  The Spo0A protein of Bacillus subtilis is a DNA-binding protein that is required for the expression of genes involved in the initiation of sporulation. Spo0A binds directly to and both activates and represses transcription from the promoters of several genes required during the onset of endospore formation. The C-terminal 113 residues are known to contain the DNA-binding activity of Spo0A. Previous studies identified a region of the C-terminal half of Spo0A that is highly conserved among species of endospore-forming Bacillus and Clostridium and which encodes a putative helix-turn-helix DNA-binding domain. To test the functional significance of this region and determine if this motif is involved in DNA binding, we changed three conserved residues, S210, E213, and R214, to Gly and/or Ala by site-directed mutagenesis. We then isolated and analyzed the five substitution-containing Spo0A proteins for DNA binding and sporulation-specific gene activation. The S210A Spo0A mutant exhibited no change from wild-type binding, although it was defective in spoIIA and spoIIE promoter activation. In contrast, both the E213G and E213A Spo0A variants showed decreased binding and completely abolished transcriptional activation of spoIIA and spoIIE, while the R214G and R214A variants completely abolished both DNA binding and transcriptional activation. These data suggest that these conserved residues are important for transcriptional activation and that the E213 residue is involved in DNA binding.    The product of bacteriophage phi29 early gene 6, protein p6, is a double-stranded-DNA binding protein and one of the more abundant proteins during viral infection. We have studied the role of protein p6 in vivo through the infection of suppressor and nonsuppressor Bacillus subtilis strains with a phage carrying a nonsense mutation in gene 6, sus6(626). In the absence of functional protein p6, the two major processes of the viral cycle, transcription and DNA replication, were affected. Viral DNA synthesis was practically abolished, and early transcription was remarkably delayed and, in addition, underregulated at late times of the infection. The amount of protein p6 synthesized after infection with mutant phage sus6(626) under suppressor conditions was sixfold lower than that produced after wild-type infection. Nonetheless, phage production was as high as that obtained after wild-type infection. These results indicate that p6 is synthesized in amounts higher than those needed for most of its functions. However, the concentration of protein p6 appeared to be important for repression of the early promoter C2.    Using the method for identification of promoters recognized by the sporulation-specific sigma factor sigmaF, we identified a promoter, cspAp, in Streptomyces coelicolor, which showed similarity to the consensus sequence of Bacillus subtilis promoters recognized by the general stress-response sigma factor sigmaB. cspAp directs expression of the cspA gene, which shows sequence similarity to members of the family of major cold shock proteins (CspA) from bacterial species. S1-nuclease mapping using RNA prepared from Escherichia coli containing a two-plasmid system, and from Streptomyces coelicolor at various developmental stages, identified identical transcription start points in both species, corresponding to cspAp. However, the promoter was also active in a S. coelicolor sigF mutant. Transcriptional studies indicated that cspA is transcribed as a monocistronic mRNA. The level of cspA mRNA remains almost constant in all developmental stages, is dramatically increased after cold shock, and decreased after heat shock. Disruption of the S. coelicolor cspA gene did not affect growth or differentiation at 11 degrees C or 30 degrees C.    GlnR plays a major role in regulation in Bacillus subtilis by directly controlling expression of glutamine synthetase (GS) as well as several genes involved in nitrogen metabolism. A GlnR homolog from Staphylococcus aureus was found to complement a B. subtilis glnR mutant, regulating GS levels and glnRA expression in a nitrogen-dependent manner. In a GS null mutant, S. aureus GlnR was not able to influence glnRA transcription, indicating that the S. aureus protein is able to respond to the same signals as its B. subtilis counterpart. This is the first demonstration of a relationship between GS and GlnR from a heterologous system and suggests the presence of a regulatory network in S. aureus that responds to changes in environmental nitrogen similar to that described for B. subtilis.    The sugar transport system called phosphoenolpyruvate: sugar phosphotransferase (PTS) is widespread among eubacteria. Its is generally composed of two cytoplasmic proteins, HPr and El, which are found in all bacteria possessing a PTS, and a family of Ells whose number, specificity, and molecular structure in terms of domain arrangement vary from species to species. In low G+C Gram-positive bacteria, the genes coding for the general proteins HPr and El, designated ptsH and ptsl respectively, are organized into the pts operon. In this paper, we summarize current knowledge about the regulation of the pts operon in low G+C Gram-positive bacteria. Physiological data indicate that El and most particularly HPr make up a substantial proportion of cellular proteins. Their synthesis is not coordinated and is influenced by environmental factors. The principal DNA cis-elements involved in the regulation of pts operon transcription are a strong promoter whose sequence and structure are very similar to those of the canonical promoter recognized by the Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis major RNA polymerases, a 5&apos;-untranslated region, a rho-dependent terminator located at the 5&apos; end of ptsl, and an intrinsic terminator located downstream from ptsl. Analysis of ptsH and ptsl Shine-Dalgarno sequences as well as experimental results obtained with a Streptococcus salivarius mutant suggest that the expression of HPr and El is also controlled at the translation level.    Pediococcus pentosaceus displays a substrate-inducible phenolic acid decarboxylase (PAD) activity on p-coumaric acid. Based on DNA sequence homologies between the three PADs previously cloned, a DNA probe of the Lactobacillus plantarum pdc gene was used to screen a P. pentosaceus genomic library in order to clone the corresponding gene of this bacteria. One clone detected with this probe displayed a low PAD activity. Subcloning of this plasmid insertion allowed us to determine the part of the insert which contains a 534-bp open reading frame (ORF) coding for a 178-amino-acid protein presenting 81.5% of identity with L. plantarum PDC enzyme. This ORF was identified as the padA gene. A second ORF was located just downstream of the padA gene and displayed 37% identity with the product of the Bacillus subtilis yfiO gene. Subcloning, transcriptional analysis, and expression studies with Escherichia coli of these two genes under the padA gene promoter, demonstrated that the genes are organized in an autoregulated bicistronic operonic structure and that the gene located upstream of the padA gene encodes the transcriptional repressor of the padA gene. Transcription of this pad operon in P. pentosaceus is acid phenol dependent.    Protein homology studies identified five kinases potentially capable of phosphorylating the Spo0F response regulator and initiating sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. Two of these kinases, KinA and KinB, were known from previous studies to be responsible for sporulation in laboratory media. In vivo studies of the activity of four of the kinases, KinA, KinC, KinD (ykvD) and KinE (ykrQ), using abrB transcription as an indicator of Spo0A approximately P level, revealed that KinC and KinD were responsible for Spo0A approximately P production during the exponential phase of growth in the absence of KinA and KinB. In vitro, all four kinases dephosphorylated Spo0F approximately P with the production of ATP at approximately the same rate, indicating that they possess approximately equal affinity for Spo0F. All the kinases were expressed during growth and early stationary phase, suggesting that the differential activity observed in growth and sporulation results from differential activation by signal ligands unique to each kinase.    A cytotoxin (CytK) has been isolated from a Bacillus cereus strain that caused a severe food poisoning outbreak killing three people. A protein of 34 kDa was highly cytotoxic, and the addition of other secreted proteins gave no synergistic effect. CytK was also necrotic and haemolytic. No known B. cereus enterotoxins were produced by this strain. A DNA sequence from 1.8 kb upstream to 0.2 kb downstream of the toxin gene was sequenced. The deduced amino acid sequence of the toxin showed similarity to Staphylococcus aureus leucocidins, gamma-haemolysin and alpha-haemolysin, Clostridium perfringens beta-toxin and B. cereus haemolysin II, all belonging to a family of beta-barrel channel-forming toxins. There was no sequence similarity between CytK and enterotoxins of B. cereus. The upstream sequence contained a partial sequence of a putative histidine kinase gene. A recognition site for PlcR, which regulates the transcription of enterotoxins HBL and Nhe of B. cereus, was found in the promoter region of the toxin. This new cytotoxin may be responsible for a disease that is similar to, although not as severe as, the necrotic enteritis caused by the beta-toxin of C. perfringens type C.    Sporulation in Bacillus involves the induction of scores of genes in a temporally and spatially co-ordinated programme of cell development. Its initiation is under the control of an expanded two-component signal transduction system termed a phosphorelay. The master control element in the decision to sporulate is the response regulator, Spo0A, which comprises a receiver or phosphoacceptor domain and an effector or transcription activation domain. The receiver domain of Spo0A shares sequence similarity with numerous response regulators, and its structure has been determined in phosphorylated and unphosphorylated forms. However, the effector domain (C-Spo0A) has no detectable sequence similarity to any other protein, and this lack of structural information is an obstacle to understanding how DNA binding and transcription activation are controlled by phosphorylation in Spo0A. Here, we report the crystal structure of C-Spo0A from Bacillus stearothermophilus revealing a single alpha-helical domain comprising six alpha-helices in an unprecedented fold. The structure contains a helix-turn-helix as part of a three alpha-helical bundle reminiscent of the catabolite gene activator protein (CAP), suggesting a mechanism for DNA binding. The residues implicated in forming the sigmaA-activating region clearly cluster in a flexible segment of the polypeptide on the opposite side of the structure from that predicted to interact with DNA. The structural results are discussed in the context of the rich array of existing mutational data.    The BACILLUS: subtilis 168 csn gene encodes a chitosanase. It was found that transcription of the csn gene was temporally regulated and was not subject to metabolic repression. Chitosanase synthesis was abolished in a csn mutant strain. Csn was overproduced in B. subtilis, partially purified and characterized. The deduced amino acid sequence, K:(m), and optimal pH and temperature of the B. subtilis enzyme were closer to those of a chitosanase from STREPTOMYCES: sp. N174 than to those of chitosanases from other BACILLUS: strains.    Expression of the Bacillus subtilis dra-nupC-pdp operon is subject to catabolite repression by glucose. It was shown that a cis-acting catabolite-responsive element (CRE) sequence located 64 bp downstream of the transcription-start site mediated catabolite repression of the dra-nupC-pdp operon as it does for many other B. subtilis genes. Point mutations in the CRE sequence caused the loss of catabolite repression of the operon. Catabolite repression of dra-nupC-pdp expression was relieved in a ccpA mutant and was found to be dependent on both HPr and the HPr-like protein Crh. Furthermore, a transcription-repair coupling factor, Mfd, was also found to be involved in the glucose repression of dra-nupC-pdp expression. By the use of in vitro gel mobility shift analysis, a specific HPr-P dependent binding of CcpA to the dra CRE site was demonstrated.    We isolated a temperature-sensitive sporulation defective mutant of the sigA gene, encoding a major sigma factor, sigma(A) protein, in Bacillus subtilis, and designated it as sigA21. The sigA21 mutation caused a single-amino acid substitution, E314K, in region 4 of the sigma(A) protein. In this mutant, expression of the spoIIG gene, whose transcription depends on both sigma(A) and the phosphorylated Spo0A protein, Spo0A approximately P, a major transcription factor during early stages of sporulation, was greatly reduced at 43 degrees C. To obtain further information on the mechanism of sigma(A) function during the early spore development, we isolated a spontaneous sporulation-proficient suppressor mutant at 43 degrees C. This extragenic suppressor mutation was mapped within the rpoB gene, encoding the beta subunit of RNA polymerase, and was found to have a single-amino acid substitution, A863G. In this mutant, the expression of the spoIIG is partially restored at 43 degrees C.    Two novel regulatory components, hrpX and hrpY, of the hrp system of Erwinia amylovora were identified. The hrpXY operon is expressed in rich media, but its transcription is increased threefold by low pH, nutrient, and temperature levels--conditions that mimic the plant apoplast. hrpXY is autoregulated and directs the expression of hrpL; hrpL, in turn, activates transcription of other loci in the hrp gene cluster (Z.-M. Wei and S. V. Beer, J. Bacteriol. 177:6201-6210, 1995). The deduced amino -acid sequences of hrpX and hrpY are similar to bacterial two-component regulators including VsrA/VsrD of Pseudomonas (Ralstonia) solanacearum, DegS/DegU of Bacillus subtilis, and UhpB/UhpA and NarX/NarP, NarL of Escherichia coli. The N-terminal signal-input domain of HrpX contains PAS domain repeats. hrpS, located downstream of hrpXY, encodes a protein with homology to WtsA (HrpS) of Erwinia (Pantoea) stewartii, HrpR and HrpS of Pseudomonas syringae, and other delta54-dependent, enhancer-binding proteins. Transcription of hrpS also is induced under conditions that mimic the plant apoplast. However, hrpS is not autoregulated, and its expression is not affected by hrpXY. When hrpS or hrpL were provided on multicopy plasmids, both hrpX and hrpY mutants recovered the ability to elicit the hypersensitive reaction in tobacco. This confirms that hrpS and hrpL are not epistatic to hrpXY. A model of the regulatory cascades leading to the induction of the E. amylovora type III system is proposed.    The complete primary structure of the str operon of Bacillus stearothermophilus was determined. It was established that the operon is a five-gene transcriptional unit: 5&apos;-ybxF (unknown function; homology to eukaryotic ribosomal protein L30)-rpsL (S12)-rpsG (S7)-fus (elongation factor G [EF-G])-tuf (elongation factor Tu [EF-Tu])-3&apos;. The main operon promoter (strp) was mapped upstream of ybxF, and its strength was compared with the strength of the tuf-specific promoter (tufp) located in the fus-tuf intergenic region. The strength of the tufp region to initiate transcription is about 20-fold higher than that of the strp region, as determined in chloramphenicol acetyltransferase assays. Deletion mapping experiments revealed that the different strengths of the promoters are the consequence of a combined effect of oppositely acting cis elements, identified upstream of strp (an inhibitory region) and tufp (a stimulatory A/T-rich block). Our results suggest that the oppositely adjusted core promoters significantly contribute to the differential expression of the str operon genes, as monitored by the expression of EF-Tu and EF-G.    Adaptation of bacterial cells to diverse habitats relies on the ability of RNA polymerase to respond to various regulatory signals. Some of these signals are conserved throughout evolution, whereas others are species specific. In this study we present a comprehensive comparative analysis of RNA polymerases from two distantly related bacterial species, Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis, using a panel of in vitro transcription assays. We found substantial species-specific differences in the ability of these enzymes to escape from the promoter and to recognize certain types of elongation signals. Both enzymes responded similarly to other pause and termination signals and to the general E. coli elongation factors NusA and GreA. We also demonstrate that, although promoter recognition depends largely on the sigma subunit, promoter discrimination exhibited in species-specific fashion by both RNA polymerases resides in the core enzyme. We hypothesize that differences in signal recognition are due to the changes in contacts made between the beta and beta&apos; subunits and the downstream DNA duplex.    Arginine anaerobic catabolism occurs in Bacillus licheniformis through the arginine deiminase pathway, encoded by the gene cluster arcABDC. We report here the involvement of a new protein, ArcR, in the regulation of the pathway. ArcR is a protein of the Crp/Fnr family encoded by a gene located 109 bp downstream from arcC. It binds to a palindromic sequence, very similar to an Escherichia coli Crp binding site, located upstream from arcA. Residues in the C-terminal domain of Crp that form the DNA binding motif, in particular residues Arg-180 and Glu-181 that make specific bonds with DNA, are conserved in ArcR, suggesting that the complexes formed with DNA by Crp and ArcR are similar. Moreover, the pattern of DNase I hypersensitivity sites induced by the binding of ArcR suggests that ArcR bends the DNA in the same way as Crp. From the absence of anaerobic induction following inactivation of arcR and from the existence of a binding site upstream of the arcA transcription start point, it can be inferred that ArcR is an activator of the arginine deiminase pathway.    Bacillus subtilis FtsY (Srb) is a homologue of the alpha subunit of the receptor for mammalian signal-recognition particle (SRP) and is essential for protein secretion and vegetative cell growth. The ftsY gene is expressed during both the exponential phase and sporulation. In vegetative cells, ftsY is transcribed with two upstream genes, rncS and smc, that are under the control of the major transcription factor sigma(A). During sporulation, Northern hybridization detected ftsY mRNA in wild-type cells, but not in sporulating cells of sigma(K) and gerE mutants. Therefore, ftsY is solely expressed during sporulation from a sigma(K)- and GerE-controlled promoter that is located immediately upstream of ftsY inside the smc gene. To examine the role of FtsY during sporulation, the B. subtilis strain ISR39 was constructed, a ftsY conditional mutant in which ftsY expression can be shut off during spore formation but not during the vegetative state. Electron microscopy showed that the outer coat of ISR39 spores was not completely assembled and immunoelectron microscopy localized FtsY to the inner and outer coats of wild-type spores.    We report the complete sequence of an extreme halophile, Halobacterium sp. NRC-1, harboring a dynamic 2,571,010-bp genome containing 91 insertion sequences representing 12 families and organized into a large chromosome and 2 related minichromosomes. The Halobacterium NRC-1 genome codes for 2,630 predicted proteins, 36% of which are unrelated to any previously reported. Analysis of the genome sequence shows the presence of pathways for uptake and utilization of amino acids, active sodium-proton antiporter and potassium uptake systems, sophisticated photosensory and signal transduction pathways, and DNA replication, transcription, and translation systems resembling more complex eukaryotic organisms. Whole proteome comparisons show the definite archaeal nature of this halophile with additional similarities to the Gram-positive Bacillus subtilis and other bacteria. The ease of culturing Halobacterium and the availability of methods for its genetic manipulation in the laboratory, including construction of gene knockouts and replacements, indicate this halophile can serve as an excellent model system among the archaea.    We have previously reported that YaaH and YrbA are spore proteins of Bacillus subtilis that are required for spore resistance and/or germination and that they have a motif conserved among so-called cell wall binding proteins [Kodama et al. (1999) J. Bacteriol. 181, 4584-4591, Takamatsu et al. (1999) J. Bacteriol. 181, 4986-4994]. In this study, we analyzed the expression of ydhD, ykuD, and ykvP genes, which encode putative proteins containing the same motif. Transcription of ydhD was dependent on SigE, and the mRNA was detectable from 2 h after the cessation of logarithmic growth (T(2) of sporulation). ykuD was transcribed by SigK RNA polymerase from T(4) of sporulation. Both SigK and GerE were essential for ykvP expression, and this gene was transcribed from T(5) of sporulation. Inactivation of these genes by insertion of an erythromycin resistance gene did not affect vegetative growth, spore resistance to heat, chloroform, and lysozyme, or spore germination in the presence of L-alanine or in a mixture of L-asparagine, D-glucose, D-fructose, and potassium chloride. The His tag fusions of YdhD, YkuD, and YkvP downstream of their natural promoter regions were introduced into a multicopy plasmid. These fusion proteins were produced during sporulation in B. subtilis transformants and were detected in mature spores, indicating that YdhD, YkuD, and YkvP are all proteins intrinsic to spores. Excessive YkuD and YkvP in the sporulating cells did not affect spore resistance or germination. The cells producing excessive YdhD also did not show impaired spore resistance, but their germination properties were changed: the spores revealed reduced response to L-alanine and some of them germinated even without germinants. Escherichia coli b-lactamase, whose signal sequence had been genetically replaced by the cell wall binding motif of YaaH, was produced in sporulating cells, and Western blot analysis indicated that the fused protein was assembled into spores. We speculate that the conserved motif functions as a kind of signal sequence involved in assembly of these proteins on forespores.    Cry1 protoxins of Bacillus thuringiensis are insecticidal 135-kDa proteins synthesized and assembled into parasporal crystals during sporulation. After ingestion, these crystals dissolve in the midgut and active toxins with molecular masses of about 65-kDa are released from the N-terminal half of the molecule by midgut proteases. Direct synthesis of the toxin-containing N-terminal half of Cry1 molecules using recombinant DNA techniques results in a low level of unstable truncated proteins that do not crystallize. In the present study, inclusions of truncated Cry1C (Cry1C-t) were obtained by combining genetic elements from other endotoxin genes and operons that enhance Cry protein synthesis and crystallization. Increased levels of Cry1C-t synthesis were achieved by using cyt1A promoters to drive expression of the 5&apos; half of cry1C that included in the construct the 5&apos; cry3A STAB-SD mRNA stabilizing sequence and the 3&apos; stem-loop transcription terminator. RNA dot blot analysis showed that the STAB-SD and 3&apos; transcriptional termination sequences were important for stabilization of truncated cry1C (cry1C-t) mRNA. A low level of cry1C-t mRNA was present when only the cyt1A promoters were used to express cry1C-t, but no accumulation of Cry1C-t was detected in Western blots. The orientation of the transcription terminator was important to enhancing Cry1C-t synthesis. Inclusion of the 20- and 29-kDa helper protein genes in cry1C-t constructs further enhanced synthesis. The Cry1C-t protein was toxic to Spodoptera exigua larvae, though the toxicity (50% lethal concentration [LC(50)] = 13.2 &amp;mgr;g/ml) was lower than that of full-length Cry1C (LC(50) = 1.8 &amp;mgr;g/ml). However, transformation of the HD1 isolate of B. thuringiensis subsp. kurstaki with the cry1C-t construct enhanced its toxicity to S. exigua as much as fourfold.    Sigma factor sigma(28) (sigma(F), FliA, SigD) directs RNA polymerase to transcribe the genes required for flagellar biosynthesis and chemotaxis in many bacteria, including Bacillus subtilis, Legionella pneumophila, Salmonella typhimurium, Escherichia coli, Yersinia enterolytica, Treponema maltophilum and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Remarkably the fliA gene from the extreme thermophile Aquifex aeolicus restored motility to the E. coli mutant at relatively low temperature, albeit partially. This clearly demonstrates that A. aeolicus sigma(28) is able to direct RNA polymerase to E. coli sigma(28)-dependent promoters and take part in the complex interactions required to support transcription of the flagellar apparatus in vivo. The ability of A. aeolicus sigma(28) to function with mesophilic components shows that critical functional interactions made by these sigma factors are well conserved, and are not dependent upon high temperature. We over-produced and purified the sigma(28) protein and demonstrated binding to E. coli core RNA polymerase in vitro. In common with SigD from B. subtilis, but unlike most sigma factors, A. aeolicus sigma(28) showed DNA binding activity in vitro but there was no evidence of sequence specificity. We note that A. aeolicus sigma(28) is a good candidate for structural studies.    We identified in Listeria monocytogenes a gene encoding a protein homologous to MecA, a regulatory protein acting with ClpC and ComK in the competence pathway of Bacillus subtilis. In L. monocytogenes, MecA is involved, along with ClpC and ClpP, in the downregulation of a 64-kDa secreted protein. In B. subtilis, the MecA protein of L. monocytogenes behaves as a regulatory protein, controlling the transcription of comK and comG. Complete or disrupted ComK homologues were also found in L. monocytogenes. However, we failed to detect competence in various strains of L. monocytogenes, including those with intact ComK. Our results suggest that the functions of MecA in the saprophytes L. monocytogenes and B. subtilis have presumably diverged in response to their respective ecological niches.    The molecular mechanisms of regulation of the genes involved in the biosynthesis of cysteine are poorly characterized in Bacillus subtilis and other gram-positive bacteria. In this study we describe the expression pattern of the B. subtilis cysH operon in response to sulfur starvation. A 6.1-kb polycistronic transcript which includes the cysH, cysP, ylnB, ylnC, ylnD, ylnE, and ylnF genes was identified. Its synthesis was induced by sulfur limitation and strongly repressed by cysteine. The cysH operon contains a 5&apos; leader portion homologous to that of the S box family of genes involved in sulfur metabolism, which are regulated by a transcription termination control system. Here we show that induction of B. subtilis cysH operon expression is dependent on the promoter and independent of the leader region terminator, indicating that the operon is regulated at the level of transcription initiation rather than controlled at the level of premature termination of transcription. Deletion of a 46-bp region adjacent to the -35 region of the cysH promoter led to high-level expression of the operon, even in the presence of cysteine. We also found that O-acetyl-L-serine (OAS), a direct precursor of cysteine, renders cysH transcription independent of sulfur starvation and insensitive to cysteine repression. We propose that transcription of the cysH operon is negatively regulated by a transcriptional repressor whose activity is controlled by the intracellular levels of OAS. Cysteine is predicted to repress transcription by inhibiting the synthesis of OAS, which would act as an inducer of cysH expression. These novel results provide the first direct evidence that cysteine biosynthesis is controlled at a transcriptional level by both negative and positive effectors in a gram-positive organism.    Inactivation of ccpA in Enterococcus faecalis leads to reduction of the growth rate, derepression of the galKETR operon in the presence of a mixture of glucose and galactose, and reduction of transcription of ldh in the presence of glucose. Moreover, the E. faecalis ccpA gene fully complements a Bacillus subtilis ccpA mutant, arguing for similar functions of these two homologous proteins. Protein comparison on two-dimensional gels from the wild-type cells and the ccpA mutant cells revealed a pleiotropic effect of the mutation on gene expression. The HPr protein of the carbohydrate-phosphotransferase system was identified by microsequencing, and a modification of its phosphorylation state was observed between the wild-type and the mutant strains. Moreover, at least 16 polypeptides are overexpressed in the mutant, and 6 are repressed. Interestingly, 13 of the 16 polypeptides whose synthesis is enhanced in the mutant were also identified as glucose starvation proteins. The N-terminal amino acid sequences of four of them match sequences deduced from genes coding for L-serine dehydratase, dihydroxyacetone kinase (two genes), and a protein of unknown function from Deinococcus radiodurans.    Sixteen long-range crosslinks are induced in Escherichia coli 16S rRNA by far-UV irradiation. Crosslinking patterns in two other organisms, Bacillus subtilis and Thermus aquaticus, were investigated to determine if the number and location of crosslinks in E.coli occur because of unusually photoreactive nucleotides at particular locations in the rRNA sequence. Thirteen long-range crosslinks in B.subtilis and 15 long-range crosslinks in T.aquaticus were detected by gel electrophoresis and 10 crosslinks in each organism were identified completely by reverse transcription analysis. Of the 10 identified crosslinks in B.subtilis, eight correspond exactly to E.coli crosslinks and two crosslinks are formed close to sites of crosslinks in E.coli. Of the 10 identified crosslinks in T.aquaticus, five correspond exactly to E.coli crosslinks, three are formed close to E.coli crosslinking sites, one crosslink corresponds to a UV laser irradiation-induced crosslink in E.coli and the last is not seen in E.coli. The overall similarity of crosslink positions in the three organisms suggests that the crosslinks arise from tertiary interactions that are highly conserved but with differences in detail in some regions.    The ytrABCDEF operon of Bacillus subtilis was deduced to encode a putative ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transport system. YtrB and YtrE could be the ABC subunits, and YtrC and YtrD are highly hydrophobic and could form a channel through the cell membrane, while YtrF could be a periplasmic lipoprotein for substrate binding. Expression of the operon was examined in cells grown in a minimal medium. The results indicate that the expression was induced only early in the stationary phase. The six ytr genes form a single operon, transcribed from a putative sigma(A)-dependent promoter present upstream of ytrA. YtrA, which possesses a helix-turn-helix motif of the GntR family, acts probably as a repressor and regulates its own transcription. Inactivation of the operon led to a decrease in maximum cell yield and less-efficient sporulation, suggesting its involvement in the growth in stationary phase and sporulation. It is known that B. subtilis produces acetoin as an external carbon storage compound and then reuses it later during stationary phase and sporulation. When either the entire ytr operon or its last gene, ytrF, was inactivated, the production of acetoin was not affected, but the reuse of acetoin became less efficient. We suggest that the Ytr transport system plays a role in acetoin utilization during stationary phase and sporulation.    Cell surface (S)-layer protein synthesis in Bacillus stearothermophilus PV72/p6 is blocked when cells are grown at elevated temperature. From a culture exhibiting the S-layer-negative phenotype, the S-layer deficient mutant T5 (SbsA-) was isolated. Genetic analysis of the S-layer-encoding gene (sbsA) of mutant T5 revealed an insertion element (IS4712) integrated into the upstream regulatory region of the S-layer gene, thereby blocking sbsA transcription. The insertion element consists of 1371 base pairs which are flanked by two perfect inverted terminal repeats. Sequence similarity to other transposases of the IS4 family was detected. DNA-DNA hybridizations demonstrated that multiple homologues of IS4712 were also present within the genomes of several other thermophilic bacillus isolates. Attempts to isolate SbsA+ revertants failed. Instead, cells with altered surface proteins were detected. The synthesis of the altered S-layer proteins was correlated with the presence of IS4712 along with the occurrence of deletions in the sbsA coding region. Furthermore imprecise excision of IS4712 was detected. This work demonstrated that B. stearothermophilus is able to express at least four different S-layer proteins and that blocking of sbsA transcription by the insertion element IS4712 is associated with the expression of altered surface proteins.    The gene encoding beta-galactosidase was isolated by functional complementation of Escherichia coli from Bifidobacterium longum MB219, which exhibited the highest activity among ten Bifidobacterium strains tested of the species B. longum, B. breve, B. adolescentis, B. indicum, B. animalis and B. cuniculi. The nucleotide sequence of the 5.0-kb fragment conferring the positive beta-galactosidase phenotype to E. coli revealed the presence of a lacZ-type gene encoding a 1023-amino-acid protein that was preceded by a ribosome binding site. A sequence showing 72% identity with the proline tRNA of Bacillus subtilis and a gene probably encoding the DNA-3-methyladenine glycosydase I were located downstream from the lacZ gene, after a gap of 30-50 unsequenced base pairs. By primer-extension analysis, the transcription start site of the lacZ gene was mapped 65 nt upstream from the start codon, and it enabled identification of the -10 region of the putative promoter. The nucleotide sequence of lacZ and its deduced amino acid sequence were compared with those of beta-galactosidase genes and enzymes from other microorganisms. High similarity was demonstrated between the B. longum beta-galactosidase and its counterparts in Lactobacillus delbruckii subsp. bulgaricus, Streptococcus salivarius subsp. thermophilus, E. coli, Clostridium acetobutylicum, Leuconostoc lactis, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Kluyveromyces marxianus var. lactis, all belonging to the LacZ family. The B. longum MB219 lacZ gene was cloned in Bifidobacterium and its expression was observed in strains with otherwise low levels of endogenous activity. The expression increased by factors of 1.5-50 and enabled those strains that do not grow on lactose to use this sugar as sole carbon source.    A cloned 2.5 kb DNA fragment that can restore antibiotic production and sporulation to a bldG mutant encodes a 113 aa protein showing similarity to a family of anti-anti-sigma factors from BACILLUS: and STAPHYLOCOCCUS:; and the deduced product of a closely spaced downstream ORF, designated ORF3, shows similarity to cognate anti-sigma factors. The homologues in BACILLUS: regulate the activity of sporulation- and stress-response-specific sigma factors. However, there is no sigma factor gene near bldG and ORF3. bldG is transcribed both as a monocistronic and a polycistronic mRNA, the latter including the downstream ORF3 gene. The two transcripts were present at all time points during growth and both were upregulated when aerial mycelium and pigmented antibiotics were seen. At all time points, the monocistronic bldG transcript was two- to threefold more abundant than the polycistronic transcript. Mapping of the mRNA 5&apos; ends indicated that bldG transcription is initiated from two transcription start sites located 82 and 123 bp upstream of the bldG translation start. A constructed bldG null mutant had the same phenotype as previously isolated bldG point mutations, some of which were shown to have potentially significant base changes within bldG. When compared to the wild-type strain, the null mutant showed no differences in the levels of transcription from the two bldG promoters. These results suggest that bldG is not involved in autoregulation.    A two-component signal transduction system composed of a sensor kinase, ResE, and a response regulator, ResD, encoded by resD and resE genes of the res operon (resABCDE), has a regulatory role in both aerobic and anaerobic respiration. In terms of aerobic respiration, resD functions upstream of ctaA, a gene required for haem A biogenesis and hence for the synthesis of haem A-containing cytochrome terminal oxidases. Although ResD is probably a transcription factor, there was no direct evidence that ResD protein, either phosphorylated or unphosphorylated, interacts directly with regulatory regions of ResD-controlled genes. Here, we report the overexpression and purification of ResD and ResE and their role in gene activation. ResD can be phosphorylated by ResE in vitro and is a monomer in solution in either the phosphorylated or unphosphorylated state. The binding activity of ResD to the ctaA promoter was examined by gel shift assays and DNase I footprinting assays. DNase I footprinting showed both unphosphorylated and phosphorylated ResD binding to the ctaA promoter and showed that there are three binding sites (A1, A2 and A3), two (A1 and A2) upstream of the -35 promoter region and one (A3) downstream of the -10 of the promoter. The role of each site in ctaA promoter activity and ResD binding was characterized using deletion analysis, followed by the DNase I footprinting and in vivo transcription assays of promoter-lacZ fusions. Our results showed that the concentration of ResD required to bind at each site is different and that ResD binding at the A1 site is independent of the other two ResD binding sites, but that the concentration of ResD approximately P required to protect site A2 is reduced when site A3 is present. In vivo transcription assays from promoter-lacZ fusion constructs showed that DNA containing ResD-binding site A2 was essential for promoter activity and that promoter constructs containing both binding sites A2 and A3 were sufficient for full promoter activity.    The two-component regulatory proteins ResD and ResE are required for anaerobic nitrate respiration in Bacillus subtilis. ResD, when it undergoes ResE-dependent phosphorylation, is thought to activate transcriptionally anaerobically induced genes such as fnr, hmp and nasD. In this report, deletion analysis of the fnr, hmp and nasD promoter regions was carried out to identify cis-acting sequences required for ResDE-dependent transcription. The results suggest that the hmp and nasD promoters have multiple target sequences for ResDE-dependent regulation and that fnr has a single target site. Gel mobility shift assays and DNase I footprinting analyses were performed to determine whether ResD interacts directly with the regulatory regions of the three genes. Our results indicate that ResD specifically binds to sequences residing upstream of the hmp and nasD promoters and that phosphorylation of ResD significantly stimulates this binding. In contrast, a higher concentration of ResD is required for binding to the fnr promoter region and no stimulation of the binding by ResD phosphorylation was observed. Taken together, these results suggest that ResD activates transcription of fnr, hmp and nasD by interacting with DNA upstream of these promoters. Our results suggest that phosphorylation of ResD stimulates binding to multiple ResD binding sites, but is much less stimulatory if only a single binding site exists.    The uptake and assimilation of nitrogen sources is effectively regulated in bacteria. In the Gram-negative enterobacterium Escherichia coli, the NtrB/C two-component system is responsible for the activation of transcription of different enzymes and transporters, depending on the nitrogen status of the cell. In this study, we investigated regulation of ammonium uptake in Corynebacterium glutamicum, a Gram-positive soil bacterium closely related to Mycobacterium tuberculosis. As shown by Northern blot hybridizations, regulation occurs on the level of transcription upon nitrogen starvation. In contrast to enterobacteria, a repressor protein is involved in regulation, as revealed by measurements of methylammonium uptake and beta-galactosidase activity in reporter strains. The repressor-encoding gene, designated amtR, was isolated and sequenced. Deletion of amtR led to deregulation of transcription of amt coding for the C. glutamicum (methyl)ammonium uptake system. E. coli extracts from amtR-expressing cells were applied in gel retardation experiments, and binding of AmtR to the amt upstream region was observed. By deletion analyses, a target motif for AmtR binding was identified, and binding of purified AmtR protein to this motif, ATCTATAGN1-4ATAG, was shown. Furthermore, the binding of AmtR to this sequence was proven in vivo using a yeast one-hybrid system. Subsequent studies showed that AmtR not only regulates transcription of the amt gene but also of the amtB-glnK-glnD operon encoding an amt paralogue, the signal transduction protein PII and the uridylyltransferase/uridylyl-removing enzyme, key components of the nitrogen regulatory cascade. In summary, regulation of ammonium uptake and assimilation in the high G+C content Gram-positive bacterium C. glutamicum differs significantly from the mechanism found in the low G+C content Gram-positive model organism Bacillus subtilis and from the paradigm of nitrogen control in the Gram-negative enterobacteria.    citS and citT genes encoding a new two-component system were identified in the 71 degrees region between the pel and citM loci on the Bacillus subtilis chromosome. citS- and citT-deficient strains were unable to grow on minimal plates including citrate as a sole carbon source. In addition, a strain deficient in citM, which encodes the secondary transporter of the Mg-citrate complex, exhibited the same phenotype on this medium. Northern blot analysis revealed that citM was polycistronically transcribed with the downstream yflN gene, and that CitS and CitT were necessary for transcription of the citM-yflN operon. Upon addition of 2 mM citrate to DSM, this operon was strongly induced after the middle of the exponential growth phase in the wild type, but not in the citST double null mutant. Moreover, the transcription of this operon was completely repressed in the presence of 1% glucose. We found a sequence exhibiting homology to a catabolite-responsive element (cre) in the citM promoter region. Glucose repression was lost in ccpA and citM-cre mutants. From the result of a citM-promoter deletion experiment, putative CitT target sequences were found to be located around two regions, from -62 to -74 and from -149 to -189, relative to the citM start point. Furthermore, DNase I footprinting assays revealed that these two CitT target regions extended maximally from -36 to -84 and from -168 to -194. From these findings, we concluded that the expression of citM is positively regulated by the CitST system and negatively regulated by CcpA.    In Bacillus subtilis, several processes associated with the onset of stationary phase, including the initiation of sporulation, require the activity of the minor sigmaH form of RNA polymerase (RNAP). The induction of sigmaH-dependent gene transcription requires the regulatory ATPase, ClpX. The ClpX-dependent post-exponential increase in sigmaH activity is not dependent on the activator of sporulation gene expression, Spo0A. By determining the level of sigmaH and sigmaA in whole-cell extracts and RNAP preparations, evidence is presented that clpX does not influence the concentration of sigma subunits, but is required for the stationary phase reduction in sigmaA-RNAP holoenzyme. This is probably an indirect consequence of ClpX activity, because the ClpX-dependent decrease in sigmaA-RNAP concentration does not occur in a spo0A abrB mutant. The addition of ClpX to in vitro transcription reactions resulted in the stimulation of RNAP holoenzyme activity, but sigmaH-RNAP was observed to be more sensitive to ClpX-dependent stimulation than sigmaA-RNAP. No difference in transcriptional activity was observed in single-cycle in vitro transcription reactions, suggesting that ClpX acted at a step in transcription initiation after closed- and open-promoter complex formation. ClpX is proposed to function indirectly in the displacement of sigmaA from core RNAP and to act directly in the stimulation of sigmaH-dependent transcription in sporulating B. subtilis cells.    The Bacillus subtilis clpX and clpP genes are the sites of pleiotropic mutations that adversely affect growth on a variety of media and impair developmental processes such as sporulation and competence development. ClpX is necessary for the post-exponential induction of genes that require the sigmaH form of RNA polymerase for transcription. Both ClpX and ClpP are required for the activation of sigmaA-dependent transcription of the srf operon that encodes surfactin synthetase and the regulatory peptide ComS, required for the development of genetic competence. Transcription of srf is activated by the two-component regulatory system ComPA in response to the peptide pheromone, ComX, which mediates cell density-dependent control. A clpX mutant, although able to produce ComX, is unable to respond to the pheromone. A mutant allele of comP, encoding a product whose activity is independent of ComX, is not able to suppress clpX with respect to srf expression, suggesting that ClpXP acts at the level of ComA-dependent activation of srf transcription initiation. Suppressor mutations of clpX (cxs-1 and cxs-2) were isolated in screens for pseudorevertants exhibiting high levels of srf expression and sigmaH-dependent transcription respectively. One mutation, cxs-1, suppressed a clpP null mutation with respect to srf transcription, but did not overcome the block conferred by clpP on competence development and sporulation. Both cxs-1 and cxs-2 mutations map to the region of the rpoA gene encoding the RNA polymerase alpha C-terminal domain (alphaCTD). The reconstruction of the cxs-1 and cxs-2 alleles of rpoA confirmed that these mutations confer the suppressor phenotype. These findings provide further support for the hypothesis that ClpX and ClpP might be intimately associated with transcription initiation in B. subtilis.    Several characteristics identify the protein encoded by the alsS gene [sll1981 in Cyanobase (http://www.kazusa.or.jp/cyano/cyano. html)] of Synechocystis PCC6803 as an acetolactate synthase. The AlsS protein is about 60% homologous to the AlsS from Bacillus subtilis or other bacteria. These enzymes condense two pyruvates to form acetolactate, implicated in pH homeostasis via the acetoin-2, 3-butanediol pathway or in valine biosynthesis. Transcriptional fusions revealed that alsS was induced at the onset of stationary phase, as in B. subtilis, a situation leading to an increase in the pHout to above 11 in Synechocystis. This is the first cyanobacterial gene showing a dependence on pH for its expression. Induction was also obtained by the presence of &gt; 100 mM Na+, the effect being prevented by amiloride, in agreement with Na+/H+ exchange in the pH homeostasis process. Homology of the Synechocystis AlsS protein to the close family of acetohydroxy acid synthases (including one in Synechocystis) is around 30%. These enzymes are involved in the parallel routes for valine/leucine and isoleucine biosynthesis. No phenotype of auxotrophy for any of these amino acids was associated with a null mutation in the Synechocystis alsS gene. The AlsS enzyme did not complement the isoleucine deficiency of an acetohydroxy acid synthase-deficient Escherichia coli mutant.    The ClpC ATPase is a subfamily of HSP100/Clp molecular chaperones-regulators of proteolysis. By screening a library of loss of function mutants for the ability to survive treatment with penicillin, we identified the gene clpC. The corresponding protein was identified as a ClpC ATPase, sharing strong peptide sequence identity with ClpC of Bacillus subtilis, Listeria monocytogenes and Lactococcus lactis. Northern blot experiments showed that expression of clpC was induced in response to high temperature (40-42 degrees C) versus 37 degrees C, suggesting that ClpC is a heat shock protein. Insertional duplication mutagenesis of clpC resulted in increased tolerance to high temperature; a result in contrast to other bacterial Clp proteases. The clpC-deficient mutant formed long chains and failed to undergo lysis after treatment with penicillin or vancomycin. The effect of the clpC mutation extended to deficiency of adherence to the human type II alveolar cells. Finally, the clpC disruption resulted in decreased genetic transformation. Western blot analysis demonstrated that the mutant failed to express pneumolysin and the choline-binding proteins LytA, CbpA, CbpE, CbpF, CbpJ. These results suggest that the heat shock protein ClpC plays an essential complex pleiotropic role in pneumococcal physiology, including cell growth under heat stress, cell division, autolysis, adherence and transformation.    A reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) method designed to reduce false-positive results due to the co-amplification of contaminating genomic DNA is reported. Feasibility of the method was evaluated using 16S rRNA sequences specific to Bacillus cereus. A DNA oligonucleotide primer, consisting of 22-bases containing three consecutive mismatched bases near its 3&apos; terminus (primer B16RT), was used for reverse transcription and in subsequent cDNA amplification. Specific rRNA was reverse transcribed at low temperature (40 degrees C or 45 degrees C) in the presence of primer B16RT. As subsequent PCR using primer B16RT at high (62 degrees C) annealing temperatures is not nearly as efficient as amplification using the specific primer, amplification of genomic DNA was hindered relative to the amplification of cDNA. The method was readily adapted to the selective amplification of mRNA of the Listeria monocytogenes listeriolysin O (hly) gene.    By subtractive hybridization, we isolated genes, differentially expressed in virulent strain (dev), that are expressed at higher levels in the virulent Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv strain in comparison to its avirulent counterpart, H37Ra, and consequently may be associated with the virulence phenotype of M. tuberculosis. A two-component system, devR-devS, was identified by DNA sequencing of a dev clone. DevR, the predicted gene product of devR, is a response regulator (RR) in the NarL/ UhpA subfamily of two-component systems. The devS gene product displayed homology with histidine protein kinases (HPKs) including UhpB, NarX and NarQ. The devR-devS locus is preceded by gene Rv3134c that encodes a putative alanine-aline- rich protein. This locus was conserved in M. tuberculosis and M. bovis BCG but not in other mycobacteria. A devR -lacZ transcription fusion demonstrated beta-galactosidase activity in M. smegmatis and in M. tuberculosis. The devR and devS genes were cotranscribed and the levels of their transcripts were lower in two isolates of the avirulent H37Ra strain in comparison to the virulent H37Rv strain of M. tuberculosis. The level of DevR protein was also lower in one of the H37Ra strains in comparison to the H37Rv strain. However, in a third isolate of H37Ra, RNA and protein expression was equivalent to that in the H37Rv strain. Electron microscopic immunogold analysis of M. tuberculosis grown in laboratory medium and within human monocytes revealed specific labelling for DevR protein within the bacteria and the phagosomal lumen of infected monocytes. These findings collectively suggest a potential role for devR-devS in the regulation of genetic programmes unique to the tubercle bacillus. Copyright 2000 Harcourt Publishers Ltd.    The composition of predominant soil bacteria during grassland succession was investigated in the Dutch Drentse A area. Five meadows, taken out of agricultural production at different time points, and one currently fertilized plot represented different stages of grassland succession. Since fertilization and agricultural production were stopped, the six plots showed a constant decline in the levels of nutrients and vegetation changes. The activity of the predominant bacteria was monitored by direct ribosome isolation from soil and temperature gradient gel electrophoresis of reverse transcription (RT)-PCR products generated from bacterial 16S rRNA. The amounts of 16S rRNA of 20 predominant ribosome types per gram of soil were monitored via multiple competitive RT-PCR in six plots at different succession stages. These ribosome types mainly represented Bacillus and members of the Acidobacterium cluster and the alpha subclass of the class Proteobacteria. The 20 16S rRNA molecules monitored represented approximately half of all bacterial soil rRNA which was estimated by dot blot hybridizations of soil rRNA with the Bacteria probe EUB338. The grasslands showed highly reproducible and specific shifts of bacterial ribosome type composition. The total bacterial ribosome level increased during the first years after agricultural production and fertilization stopped. This correlated with the collapse of the dominant Lolium perenne population and an increased rate of mineralization of organic matter. The results indicate that there is a true correlation between the total activity of the bacterial community in soil and the amount of bacterial ribosomes.    We investigated the roles of fliF, fliS, flhB, fliQ, fliG, and fliI of Helicobacter pylori, predicted by homology to encode structural components of the flagellar basal body and export apparatus. Mutation of these genes resulted in nonmotile, nonflagellate strains. Western blot analysis showed that all the mutants had considerably reduced levels of both flagellin subunits and of FlgE, the flagellar hook protein. RNA slot blot hybridization showed reduced levels of flaA mRNA, indicating that transcription of the major flagellin gene is inhibited in the absence of the early components of the flagellar-assembly pathway. This is the first demonstration of a checkpoint in H. pylori flagellar assembly.    Our approach in predicting gene expression levels relates to codon usage differences among gene classes. In prokaryotic genomes, genes that deviate strongly in codon usage from the average gene but are sufficiently similar in codon usage to ribosomal protein genes, to translation and transcription processing factors, and to chaperone-degradation proteins are predicted highly expressed (PHX). By these criteria, PHX genes in most prokaryotic genomes include those encoding ribosomal proteins, translation and transcription processing factors, and chaperone proteins and genes of principal energy metabolism. In particular, for the fast-growing species Escherichia coli, Vibrio cholerae, Bacillus subtilis, and Haemophilus influenzae, major glycolysis and tricarboxylic acid cycle genes are PHX. In Synechocystis, prime genes of photosynthesis are PHX, and in methanogens, PHX genes include those essential for methanogenesis. Overall, the three protein families-ribosomal proteins, protein synthesis factors, and chaperone complexes-are needed at many stages of the life cycle, and apparently bacteria have evolved codon usage to maintain appropriate growth, stability, and plasticity. New interpretations of the capacity of Deinococcus radiodurans for resistance to high doses of ionizing radiation is based on an excess of PHX chaperone-degradation genes and detoxification genes. Expression levels of selected classes of genes, including those for flagella, electron transport, detoxification, histidine kinases, and others, are analyzed. Flagellar PHX genes are conspicuous among spirochete genomes. PHX genes are positively correlated with strong Shine-Dalgarno signal sequences. Specific regulatory proteins, e.g., two-component sensor proteins, are rarely PHX. Genes involved in pathways for the synthesis of vitamins record low predicted expression levels. Several distinctive PHX genes of the available complete prokaryotic genomes are highlighted. Relationships of PHX genes with stoichiometry, multifunctionality, and operon structures are discussed. Our methodology may be used complementary to experimental expression analysis.    The synthesis of macrolide 2&apos;-phosphotransferase I [Mph(A)], which inactivates erythromycin, is inducible by erythromycin. The expression of high-level resistance to erythromycin requires the mph(A) and mrx genes, which encode Mph(A) and an unidentified protein, respectively. We have studied the mphR(A) gene, which regulates the inducible expression of mph(A). An analysis of the synthesis of Mph(A) in minicells and results of a complementation test indicated that mphR(A) is located downstream from mrx and that its product, MphR(A), represses the production of Mph(A). DNA sequencing indicated that the mph(A), mrx, and mphR(A) genes exist as a cluster that begins with mph(A) and that the deduced amino acid sequence of MphR(A) can adopt an alpha-helix-turn-alpha-helix structure. To study the regulation of gene expression by MphR(A), we performed Northern blotting and primer extension. A transcript of 2. 9 kb that corresponded to the transcript of mph(A) through mphR(A) was detected, and its level was elevated upon exposure of cells to erythromycin. Gel mobility shift assays and DNase I footprinting indicated that MphR(A) binds specifically to the promoter region of mph(A), and the amount of DNA shifted as a results of the binding of MphR(A) decreased as the concentration of erythromycin was increased. These results indicate that transcription of the mph(A)-mrx-mphR(A) operon is negatively regulated by the binding of a repressor protein, MphR(A), to the promoter of the mph(A) gene and is activated upon inhibition of binding of MphR(A) to the promoter in the presence of erythromycin.    The operon encoding the general stress transcription factor sigma(B) and two proteins of its regulatory network, RsbV and RsbW, was cloned from the gram-positive bacterium Bacillus anthracis by PCR amplification of chromosomal DNA with degenerate primers, by inverse PCR, and by direct cloning. The gene cluster was very similar to the Bacillus subtilis sigB operon both in the primary sequences of the gene products and in the order of its three genes. However, the deduced products of sequences upstream and downstream from this operon showed no similarity to other proteins encoded by the B. subtilis sigB operon. Therefore, the B. anthracis sigB operon contains three genes rather than eight as in B. subtilis. The B. anthracis operon is preceded by a sigma(B)-like promoter sequence, the expression of which depends on an intact sigma(B) transcription factor in B. subtilis. It is followed by another open reading frame that is also preceded by a promoter sequence similarly dependent on B. subtilis sigma(B). We found that in B. anthracis, both these promoters were induced during the stationary phase and induction required an intact sigB gene. The sigB operon was induced by heat shock. Mutants from which sigB was deleted were constructed in a toxinogenic and a plasmidless strain. These mutants differed from the parental strains in terms of morphology. The toxinogenic sigB mutant strain was also less virulent than the parental strain in the mouse model. B. anthracis sigma(B) may therefore be a minor virulence factor.    During a search for new differentiation factors in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2), a locus at 11 o&apos;clock on the S. coelicolor map was identified which harbours several genes that show extensive similarity to cell division and differentiation genes from Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis. From the sequence data it was concluded that the region contains the genes mireB, mreC, mreD (murein formation gene cluster E), pbp83 (high-molecular-weight penicillin-binding protein) and sfr (member of the spoVE/ftsW/rodA family). Mre gene products are reported to be responsible for determining cell shape in E. coli and Bacillus. The S. coelicolor mreC gene was inactivated by gene disruption, resulting in mutants which showed significant growth retardation in comparison to the wild type. Inactivation of the mreB gene was incompatible with viability, and thus mreB represents a Streptomyces cell division gene that is essential for survival. Promoter-probe experiments led to the identification of an operon structure, with promoters located upstream of mreB, pbp83 and sfr. Detailed studies of mreB transcription revealed the existence of three promoters; two of them are constitutively transcribed, whereas the third is developmentally regulated.    BACKGROUND: Bacterial transfer-messenger RNA (tmRNA, 10Sa RNA) is involved in a trans-translation reaction which contributes to the degradation of incompletely synthesized peptides and to the recycling of stalled ribosomes. However, its physiological role in the cell remains elusive. In this study, an efficient system for controlling the expression of the gene for tmRNA (ssrA), as well as a tmRNA gene-defective strain (ssrA:cat), were constructed in Bacillus subtilis. The effects of tmRNA on the growth of the cells were investigated under various physiological culture conditions using these strains. RESULTS: The cells were viable in the absence of ssrA expression under the usual culture conditions. However, the growth rate of cells without tmRNA expression, relative to that of the expressed cells, decreased with elevating temperature (&gt; 45 degrees C), and at 52 degrees C, the highest temperature for growth of the wild-type, cells grew depending on the expression level of tmRNA. Furthermore, the transcription level of the ssrA from the authentic promoter at a high temperature (51 degrees C) was about 10-fold higher than that at a lower temperature (37 degrees C). tmRNA-dependent growth and an increase in tmRNA amount were also observed in cells under other stresses, such as high concentrations of ethanol or cadmium chloride. It is also shown that alanylated tmRNA rather than tmRNA-mediated proteolysis is required for growth at high temperature. CONCLUSION: The expression of tmRNA gene (ssrA) is required for the efficient growth of B. subtilis under several strong stresses. The transcription of ssrA increases under several stressful conditions, suggesting that it is a stress-response gene. Alanyl-tmRNA, probably via its ability of recycling stalled ribosomes via trans-translation, is involved in the stress tolerance of bacteria.    Transcriptional regulation of the T box family of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase and amino acid biosynthesis genes in Gram-positive bacteria is mediated by a conserved transcription antitermination system, in which readthrough of a termination site in the leader region of the mRNA is directed by a specific interaction with the cognate uncharged tRNA. The specificity of this interaction is determined in part by pairing of the anticodon of the tRNA with a &quot;specifier sequence&quot; in the leader, a codon representing the appropriate amino acid, as well as by pairing of the acceptor end of the tRNA with an unpaired region of the antiterminator. Previous studies have indicated that although these interactions are necessary for antitermination, they are unlikely to be sufficient. In the current study, the effect of multiple mutations in tRNA(Tyr) on readthrough of the tyrS leader region terminator, independent of other tRNA functions, was assessed using a system for in vivo expression of pools of tRNA variants; this system may be generally useful for in vivo expression of RNAs with defined end points. Although alterations in helical regions of tRNA(Tyr) that did not perturb base pairing were generally permitted, substitutions affecting conserved features of tRNAs were not. The long variable arm of tRNA(Tyr) could be replaced by either a short variable arm or a long insertion of a stable stem-loop structure. These results indicate that the tRNA-leader RNA interaction is highly constrained, and is likely to involve recognition of the overall tertiary structure of the tRNA.    A 7-kb DNA fragment of Lactobacillus sakei, containing the rbsD, rbsK and rbsR genes was sequenced. The genes responsible for ribose utilization are organized differently from what was previously described for model organisms such as Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis. No gene encoding RbsA, RbsB and RbsC, the subunits of the ribose ABC-transporter, were present in the rbs gene cluster. Instead, we found an open reading frame coding for RbsU, a protein similar to GltA, the glucose transporter of Staphylococcus xylosus. The disruption of rbsK, encoding the ribokinase, impaired growth on ribose. The disruption of rbsR, encoding the repressor, had no effect on the ability to grow on ribose, but led to overexpression of a large transcript corresponding to rbsU, rbsD and rbsK, suggesting that RbsU might be involved in ribose utilization. Ribose uptake and phosphorylation assays on the wild type strain and various mutants showed that, in ptsI mutants, both ribose uptake and phosphorylation are increased. These increased activities can explain the faster growth rate on ribose that was observed in ptsI mutants. The phosphotransferase system is thus involved in the negative regulation of ribose utilization. This regulation might not act at the transcriptional level since the overexpression of the rbs genes in the rbsR mutant did not lead to the same phenotype. A gene sharing high similarity scores with ackA genes, encoding the acetate kinase, was found upstream from the rbs gene cluster. The unusual location of this gene is maybe not fortuitous since acetate kinase is involved in ribose catabolism.    Bacillus subtilis cells cannot sporulate in the presence of catabolites such as glucose. During the analysis of Tn10-generated mutants, we found that deletion of the C-terminal region of the tnrA gene, which encodes a global regulator that positively regulates a number of genes in response to nitrogen limitation, results in a catabolite-resistant sporulation phenotype. Analyses of nrg-lacZ and nasB-lacZ, which are activated by TnrA under nitrogen limitation, showed that C-terminally truncated TnrA activates nitrogen-regulated genes constitutively. The relief of catabolite repression of sporulation may result from the uncontrolled expression of the TnrA-regulated genes.    A Lactococcus lactis glycine-betaine transport system was identified by functional complementation of an Escherichia coli proP proU mutant with a gene library from L. lactis sbsp. cremoris. The cloned locus forms an operon highly homologous to opuA, encoding a glycine-betaine uptake system of Bacillus subtilis. Disruption of opuA in L. lactis abolished protection by glycine-betaine against elevated osmolarity. OpuA belongs to the so-called &quot;ABC transporters&quot; family, which comprise an extracellularly localized substrate-binding protein. In B. subtilis OpuA system, this binding protein is a lipoprotein, attached to the external face of the cytoplasmic membrane by its lipidic moiety. In contrast, in the L. lactis opuA operon, and in other gram-positive homologues as well, a fusion between the gene encoding the integral membrane protein and the substrate-binding protein components gave rise to a hybrid protein presumably attaching the substrate-binding protein to the surface of the cell via its covalent link to the integral membrane component. Mapping of L. lactis opuA transcription start identified one mRNA, more abundant in cells grown at elevated osmolarity. Construction of an opuA-gusA fusion confirmed that opuA transcription is directed by a promoter osmotically inducible in L. lactis. When recombined upstream from a lac transcriptional fusion in the chromosome of E. coli, the opuA promoter appeared as very strong, and only poorly stimulated by elevated osmotic pressure, suggesting the existence of a specific machinery involved in the osmotic signal transduction in L. lactis.    All mitochondrial tRNAs in kinetoplastid protozoa are encoded in the nucleus and imported from the cytosol. Incubation of two in vitro-transcribed tRNAs, tRNA(Ile)(UAU) and tRNA(Gln)(CUG), with isolated mitochondria from Leishmania tarentolae, in the absence of any added cytosolic fraction, resulted in a protease-sensitive, ATP-dependent importation, as measured by nuclease protection. Evidence that nuclease protection represents importation was obtained by the finding that Bacillus subtilis pre-tRNA(Asp) was protected from nuclease digestion and was also cleaved by an intramitochondrial RNase P-like activity to produce the mature tRNA. The presence of a membrane potential is not required for in vitro importation. A variety of small synthetic RNAs were also found to be efficiently imported in vitro. The data suggest that there is a structural requirement for importation of RNAs greater than approximately 17 nt, and that smaller RNAs are apparently nonspecifically imported. The signals for importation of folded RNAs have not been determined, but the specificity of the process was illustrated by the higher saturation level of importation of the mainly mitochondria-localized tRNA(Ile) as compared to the level of importation of the mainly cytosol-localized tRNA(Gln). Furthermore, exchanging the D-arm between the tRNA(Ile) and the tRNA(Gln) resulted in a reversal of the in vitro importation behavior and this could also be interpreted in terms of tertiary structure specificity.    We cloned a new gene, sigH, encoding an alternative sigma factor in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2). The deduced protein of 354 amino acids with an M(r) of 39486 showed greatest similarity to the sporulation sigma factor (sigma(F)) of S. coelicolor, general stress-response sigma(B) of Bacillus subtilis, and stationary-phase stress-response sigma(F) of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Sequence analysis of the upstream region revealed an ORF encoding a protein (UshX) similar to several anti-sigma factors, and short ORF (UshY) containing zinc-finger DNA binding motif. Transcriptional analysis revealed that all three genes are located on the same polycistronic transcript in order ushY, ushX, and sigH. Expression of the operon was directed by four promoters differentially expressed in the course of differentiation. The first (P1) constitutive promoter was located upstream of ushY. The other three promoters (P2, P3, and P4) were located upstream of ushX, and were differentially induced after various stress conditions. The magnitude of the induction was greatest after osmotic stress and heat shock.    Bacillus subtilis cells lacking the PerR repressor which regulates transcription of genes encoding oxidative stress protective proteins grew at 30-50% the rate of wild-type cells, and perR cultures accumulated rapidly growing suppressor mutants lacking the catalase whose expression is regulated by PerR. However, perR spores which retained the perR regulated catalase were obtained on plates. These perR spores had levels of oxidative stress protective proteins from 7- to 50-fold higher than those in wild-type spores, but perR spore resistance to heat, hydrogen peroxide and t-butyl hydroperoxide was essentially identical to that of wild-type spores, indicating that elevated levels of proteins that protect growing cells from oxidizing agents play no role in dormant spore resistance to these compounds. However, germinated perR spores were much more resistant to alkyl hydroperoxides than were wild-type spores.    The phosphate starvation response in Bacillus subtilis was analyzed using two-dimensional (2D) polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of cell extracts and supernatants from phosphate-starved cells. Most of the phosphate starvation-induced proteins are under the control of sigma(B), the activity of which is increased by energy depletion. In order to define the proteins belonging to the Pho regulon, which is regulated by the two-component regulatory proteins PhoP and PhoR, the 2D protein pattern of the wild type was compared with those of a sigB mutant and a phoR mutant. By matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry, two alkaline phosphatases (APases) (PhoA and PhoB), an APase-alkaline phosphodiesterase (PhoD), a glycerophosphoryl diester phosphodiesterase (GlpQ), and the lipoprotein YdhF were identified as very strongly induced PhoPR-dependent proteins secreted into the extracellular medium. In the cytoplasmic fraction, PstB1, PstB2, and TuaD were identified as already known PhoPR-dependent proteins, in addition to PhoB, PhoD, and the previously described PstS. Transcriptional studies of glpQ and ydhF confirmed the strong PhoPR dependence. Northern hybridization and primer extension experiments showed that glpQ is transcribed monocistronically from a sigma(A) promoter which is overlapped by four putative TT(A/T)ACA-like PhoP binding sites. Furthermore, ydhF might be cotranscribed with phoB initiating from the phoB promoter. Only a small group of proteins remained phosphate starvation inducible in both phoR and sigB mutant and did not form a unique regulation group. Among these, YfhM and YjbC were controlled by sigma(B)-dependent and unknown PhoPR-independent mechanisms. Furthermore, YtxH and YvyD seemed to be induced after phosphate starvation in the wild type in a sigma(B)-dependent manner and in the sigB mutant probably via sigma(H). YxiE was induced by phosphate starvation independently of sigma(B) and PhoPR.    Bacillus subtilis can grow under anaerobic conditions, either with nitrate or nitrite as the electron acceptor or by fermentation. A DNA microarray containing 4,020 genes from this organism was constructed to explore anaerobic gene expression patterns on a genomic scale. When mRNA levels of aerobic and anaerobic cultures during exponential growth were compared, several hundred genes were observed to be induced or repressed under anaerobic conditions. These genes are involved in a variety of cell functions, including carbon metabolism, electron transport, iron uptake, antibiotic production, and stress response. Among the highly induced genes are not only those responsible for nitrate respiration and fermentation but also those of unknown function. Certain groups of genes were specifically regulated during anaerobic growth on nitrite, while others were primarily affected during fermentative growth, indicating a complex regulatory circuitry of anaerobic metabolism.    Formation of the asymmetrically located septum during sporulation of Bacillus subtilis results in enclosure of the origin-proximal 30% of the chromosome in the prespore compartment. The rest of the chromosome is then translocated into the prespore from the mother cell. Transcription of spoIIR is initiated in the prespore by RNA polymerase containing sigma(F) soon after the septum is formed. The SpoIIR protein is required for the activation of the transcription program directed by sigma(E) in the mother cell. The spoIIR locus is located at 324 degrees, near the origin of replication (0/360 degrees ). We show here that movement of spoIIR to 28 degrees had little effect on sporulation. However, movement to regions not in the origin-proximal part of the chromosome substantially reduced sporulation efficiency. At 283 degrees sporulation was reduced to less than 20% of the level obtained when spoIIR was at its natural location, and movement to 190 degrees reduced sporulation to about 6% of that level. These positional effects were also seen in the transcription of a spoIIR-lacZ fusion. In contrast, movement of other spo-lacZ fusions from 28 degrees to 190 degrees had little effect on their expression. These results suggest that spoIIR is the subject of &quot;positional regulation,&quot; in the sense that the chromosomal position of spoIIR is important for its expression and function.    The lrpC gene was identified during the Bacillus subtilis genome sequencing project. Previous experiments suggested that LrpC has a role in sporulation and in the regulation of amino acid metabolism and that it shares features with Escherichia coli Lrp, a transcription regulator (C. Beloin, S. Ayora, R. Exley, L. Hirschbein, N. Ogasawara, Y. Kasahara, J. C. Alonso, and F. Le Hegarat, Mol. Gen. Genet. 256:63-71, 1997). To characterize the interactions of LrpC with DNA, the protein was overproduced and purified. We show that LrpC binds to multiple sites in the upstream region of its own gene with a stronger affinity for a region encompassing P1, one of the putative promoters identified (P1 and P2). By analyzing lrpC-lacZ transcriptional fusions, we demonstrated that P1 is the major in vivo promoter and that, unlike many members of the lrp/asnC family, lrpC is not negatively autoregulated but rather slightly positively autoregulated. Production of LrpC in vivo is low in both rich and minimal media (50 to 300 LrpC molecules per cell). In rich medium, the cellular LrpC content is six- to sevenfold lower during the exponentional phase than during the stationary growth phase. Possible determinants and the biological significance of the regulation of lrpC expression are discussed.    The NfrA protein, an oxidoreductase from the soil bacterium Bacillus subtilis, is synthesized during the stationary phase and in response to heat. Analysis of promoter mutants revealed that the nfrA gene belongs to the class III heat shock genes in B. subtilis. An approximate 10-fold induction at both the transcriptional and the translational levels was found after thermal upshock. This induction resulted from enhanced synthesis of mRNA. Genetic and Northern blot analyses revealed that nfrA and the gene downstream of nfrA are transcribed as a bicistronic transcriptional unit. The unstable full-length transcript is processed into two short transcripts encoding nfrA and ywcH. The nfrA-ywcH operon is not induced by salt stress or by ethanol. According to previously published data, the transcription of class III genes in general is activated in response to the addition of these stressors. However, this conclusion is based on experiments which lacked a valid control. Therefore, it seems possible that the transcription of all class III genes is specifically induced by heat shock.    Bacillus subtilis core RNA polymerase, containing a His(6)-fusion to the C-terminus of the beta&apos; subunit, was isolated by Ni-NTA, Superdex 200 gel filtration, and Mono Q anion-exchange chromatography. The purified core enzyme was shown to be free of the major sigma factor(A) and the transcription factors NusA and GreA. The purification procedure can be completed within 1 working day, is scalable, and yields highly purified and active core RNA polymerase. Copyright 2000 Academic Press.    The response regulator DegU is involved in various late-growth developmental processes in Bacillus subtilis, including the production of degradative enzymes and the development of genetic competence. DegU is essential for the expression of the competence transcription factor, encoded by comK. ComK is required for the transcription of genes encoding the DNA uptake and integration machinery, as well as for the transcription of its own gene. We have purified DegU to study its role in the expression of comK, and we demonstrate here that DegU binds specifically to the comK promoter. The binding of the response regulator DegU to a promoter target had not been reported previously. DNase I protection analyses show that the DegU binding site overlaps with the ComK binding site, and gel retardation experiments indicate that DegU strongly stimulates the binding of ComK to the comK promoter. We propose that DegU functions at the initiation of competence development, when ComK concentrations are insufficient to support comK transcription, by facilitating ComK binding to the comK promoter. DegU therefore acts as a priming protein that primes the autostimulatory transcription of comK. Such priming activity adds a function to the class of response regulator proteins.    Bacillus subtilis DB1005 is a temperature-sensitive (Ts) sigA mutant containing double-amino-acid substitutions (I198A and I202A) on the hydrophobic face of the promoter -10 binding helix of sigma(A) factor. We have analyzed the structural and functional properties of this mutant sigma(A) factor both in vivo and in vitro. Our data revealed that the Ts sigma(A) factor possessed predominantly a multimeric structure which was prone to aggregation at restrictive temperature. The extensive aggregation of the Ts sigma(A) resulted in a very low core-binding activity of the Ts sigma(A) factor and a markedly reduced sigma(A)-RNA polymerase activity in B. subtilis DB1005, suggesting that extensive aggregation of the Ts sigma(A) is the main trigger for the temperature sensitivity of B. subtilis DB1005. Partial proteolysis, tryptophan fluorescence and 1-anilinonaphthalene-8-sulfonate-binding analyses revealed that the hydrophobic face of the promoter -10 binding helix and also the hydrophobic core region of the Ts sigma(A) factor were readily exposed on the protein surface. This hydrophobic exposure provides an important cue for mutual interaction between molecules of the Ts sigma(A) and allows the formation of multimeric Ts sigma(A). Our results also indicate that Ile-198 and Ile-202 on the hydrophobic face of the promoter -10 binding helix are essential to ensure the correct folding and stabilization of the functional structure of sigma(A) factor.    Promoter-active fragments were isolated from the genome of the probiotic organism Lactobacillus rhamnosus strain GG using the promoter-probe vector pNZ272. These promoter elements, together with a promoter fragment isolated from the vaginal strain Lactobacillus fermentum BR11 and two previously defined promoters (Lactococcus lactis and Lactobacillus acidophilus ATCC 4356 slpA), were introduced into three strains of Lactobacillus. Primer-extension analysis was used to map the transcriptional start site for each promoter. All promoter fragments tested were functional in each of the three lactobacilli and a purine residue was used to initiate transcription in most cases. The promoter elements encompassed a 52- to 1,140-fold range in promoter activity depending on the host strain. Lactobacillus promoters were further examined by surveying previously mapped sequences for conserved base positions. The Lactobacillus hexamer regions (-35: TTgaca and -10: TAtAAT) closely resembled those of Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis, with the highest degree of agreement at the -10 hexamer. The TG dinucleotide upstream of the -10 hexamer was conserved in 26% of Lactobacillus promoters studied, but conservation rates differed between species. The region upstream of the -35 hexamer of Lactobacillus promoters showed conservation with the bacterial UP element.    Deletion of the 10 C-terminal amino acids of the Bacillus subtilis response regulator Spo0A or valine substitution at D258 and L260 resulted in a sporulation-negative phenotype and loss of in vivo activation of the spoIIG and spoIIA operon promoters. Repression of the abrB promoter was not affected by the mutations. In combination with the previously characterized mutation (A257V), the results identify amino acids at positions 257, 258, and 260 as being required for transcription activation by Spo0A.    The minimal number of genes required for the formation of gas vesicles in halophilic archaea has been determined. Single genes of the 14 gvp genes present in the p-vac region on plasmid pHH1 of Halobacterium salinarum (p-gvpACNO and p-gvpDEFGHIJKLM) were deleted, and the remaining genes were tested for the formation of gas vesicles in Haloferax volcanii transformants. The deletion of six gvp genes (p-gvpCN, p-gvpDE, and p-gvpHI) still enabled the production of gas vesicles in H. volcanii. The gas vesicles formed in some of these gvp gene deletion transformants were altered in shape (Delta I, Delta C) or strength (Delta H) but still functioned as flotation devices. A minimal p-vac region (minvac) containing the eight remaining genes (gvpFGJKLM-gvpAO) was constructed and tested for gas vesicle formation in H. volcanii. The minvac transformants did not form gas vesicles; however, minvac/gvpJKLM double transformants contained gas vesicles seen as light refractile bodies by phase-contrast microscopy. Transcript analyses demonstrated that minvac transformants synthesized regular amounts of gvpA mRNA, but the transcripts derived from gvpFGJKLM were mainly short and encompassed only gvpFG(J), suggesting that the gvpJKLM genes were not sufficiently expressed. Since gvpAO and gvpFGJKLM are the only gvp genes present in minvac/JKLM transformants containing gas vesicles, these gvp genes represent the minimal set required for gas vesicle formation in halophilic archaea. Homologs of six of these gvp genes are found in Anabaena flos-aquae, and homologs of all eight minimal halobacterial gvp genes are present in Bacillus megaterium and in the genome of Streptomyces coelicolor.    Conservation of the sporulation processes between BACILLUS: spp. and CLOSTRIDIUM: spp. was investigated through evolutionary and complementation analyses of sigma(E). Alignment of partial predicted sigma(E) amino acid sequences from three BACILLUS: spp., Paenibacillus polymyxa and five CLOSTRIDIUM: spp. revealed that amino acid residues previously reported to be involved in promoter utilization (M124, E119 and N120) and strand opening (C117) are conserved among all these species. Phylogenetic analyses of various sigma factor sequences from endospore-forming bacteria revealed that homologues of sigma(E), sigma(K) and sigma(G) clustered together regardless of genus, suggesting a common origin of sporulation sigma factors. The functional equivalence between CLOSTRIDIUM: acetobutylicum sigma(E) and BACILLUS: subtilis sigma(E) was investigated by complementing a non-polar B. subtilis sigma(E) null mutant with the spoIIG operon from either B. subtilis (spoIIG(Bs)) or C. acetobutylicum (spoIIG(Ca)). Single-copy integration of spoIIG(Bs) into the amyE locus of the sigma(E) null mutant completely restored the wild-type sporulation phenotype, while spoIIG(Ca) only partially restored sporulation. Maximal expression of spoIIG(Ca)-lacZ occurred approximately 12 h later than maximal expression of spoIIG(Bs)-lacZ. Differences in temporal expression patterns for spoIIG(Ca) and spoIIG(Bs) in the B. subtilis background may at least partially explain the observed sporulation complementation phenotypes. This study suggests a common phylogenetic ancestor for sigma(E) in BACILLUS: spp. and CLOSTRIDIUM: spp., although regulation of sigma(E) expression may differ in these two genera.    Production of a large amount of insecticidal crystal proteins encoded on large plasmids is largely dependent upon the mother cell, Bacillus thuringiensis (B. thuringiensis, also Bt), specific transcription systems attributable to sporulation. In the middle stages of sporulation, cry4A is most actively transcribed from the promoter cry4A-P1. The proximal transcriptional start point of cry4A, which is under the control of the promoter P1, is used in Bacillus subtilis (B. subtilis) in the middle stage of sporulation. The nucleotide sequence that determines the cry4A-P1 promoter is homologous to the consensus sequence for the promoter of sigma E-specific genes in B. subtilis, and to those promoters of the insecticidal protein genes that are efficiently transcribed in vitro with the RNA polymerase E sigma 35 isolated from B. thuringiensis. The sigma factor sigma 35 of B. thuringiensis is highly homologous and functionally equivalent to sigma E of B. subtilis. These results suggest that the cry4A transcription from P1 is under the control of sigma E in B. subtilis, and under the control of sigma 35 in B. thuringiensis.    Formation of an initiation-competent RNA polymerase-promoter complex involves DNA melting over a region of about 12 base-pairs, which includes the start site of transcription, thus enabling the template strand to base-pair with the initiating nucleoside triphosphates. By studying the effects of alanine substitutions, we have investigated the role of the aromatic amino residues in the Escherichia coli sigma(70) conserved region 2.3 in promoter strand separation. The resulting mutants were assessed for their activity in vivo in the context of a sigma(70)/sigma(32) hybrid sigma factor that could be targeted to a specific hybrid promoter in the cell. All substitutions lead to an at least twofold reduction in expression of the hybrid promoter-driven reporter gene. The in vitro assay of single substitutions indicated cold sensitivity similar to that previously observed with analogous substitutions in Bacillus subtilis sigma(A). Kinetic assays showed that these substitutions slowed the rate of open complex formation at 37 degrees C as well. RNA polymerase reconstituted with a sigma(70) containing multiple alanine substitutions readily binds to promoter DNA, but then proceeds slowly beyond the first intermediate complex on the pathway to formation of the transcription-competent complex. These data demonstrate that together the aromatic residues in region 2.3 of E. coli sigma(70) ensure that DNA strand separation proceeds efficiently, even if no individual residue may be essential for accomplishment of the process. Copyright 2000 Academic Press.    Spore formation by Bacillus subtilis is governed by global changes in gene transcription. We used nylon-substrate DNA arrays representing approximately 96% of the predicted open reading frames in the B. subtilis chromosome to compare the pattern of transcripts from wild-type cells with the pattern from cells mutant for the sporulation transcription factors Spo0A or final sigma(F). We found 520 genes whose transcript levels were at least 3-fold dependent on Spo0A but not on final sigma(F), and an additional 66 genes whose transcript levels were dependent upon both regulatory proteins. Two strategies were used to help assign genes to the direct control of a particular developmental regulatory protein. In one approach, we analyzed the effects on global gene expression of artificially producing a constitutively active form of Spo0A during growth. In a second approach, Hidden Markov models were used to identify promoters likely to be activated by Spo0A, final sigma(F), or a third sporulation transcription factor, final sigma(E). In addition to detecting known sporulation genes, we identified many genes of unknown function whose patterns of expression and regulation suggest that they could be involved in sporulation. Disruption of two such newly identified genes, yabP and yabQ, blocked sporulation at a late stage.    The expression of the neutral protease gene (npr) from the thermophilic Bacillus sp. BT1 strain was studied in its natural host and in mesophilic Bacillus subtilis. In the thermophilic BT1 strain, the transcription of the protease gene is initiated from its own promoter, just 5&apos; to the gene. In contrast, in heterologous B. subtilis this thermophilic npr promoter does not function, and expression of the npr gene results from transcription originating upstream of an adjacent gene, open reading frame X (ORF X). A functional promoter was identified 5&apos; to ORF X that is required for efficient expression of the npr gene in Bacillus subtilis as verified by primer extension, reverse transcription-PCR, and 5&apos; rapid amplification of cDNA ends experiments. These data suggest that transcriptional signals used in thermophilic Bacillus sp. BT1 strain are different from those used in B. subtilis.    The Bacillus subtilis nitrogen regulatory protein TnrA was purified and its interaction with the nrgAB regulatory region examined. The TnrA protein activates transcription from the nrgAB promoter in vitro. DNase I footprinting and methylation protection experiments demonstrated that TnrA binds to an inverted repeat, upstream of the -35 region of the nrgAB promoter. Gel mobility retardation assays were used to determine the affinity of TnrA for its DNA-binding site. The equilibrium dissociation binding constant for the interaction of TnrA with the nrgAB promoter fragment was 7.7 nM under the conditions used here. Mutations in the TnrA consensus sequence that reduce nrgAB expression in vivo were found to reduce significantly the in vitro affinity for TnrA. An A+T rich region located upstream of the TnrA-binding site was found to be necessary for optimal transcriptional activation. A mutant protein, TnrA(HTH), was constructed in which the putative helix-turn-helix DNA-binding motif was altered by exchanging two arginine residues for alanine residues. The TnrA(HTH) protein was unable to activate the in vivo expression of nrgAB and had an in vitro affinity for the nrgAB promoter that was significantly lower than that of the wild-type protein. Copyright 2000 Academic Press.    Two chromosome partitioning proteins, Soj (ParA) and Spo0J (ParB), regulate the initiation of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. In a spo0J null mutant, sporulation is inhibited by the action of Soj. Soj negatively regulates expression of several sporulation genes by binding to the promoter regions and inhibiting transcription. All of the genes known to be inhibited by Soj are also activated by the phosphorylated form of the transcription factor Spo0A (Spo0A approximately P). We found that, in a spo0J null mutant, Soj affected sporulation, in part, by decreasing the level of Spo0A protein. Soj negatively regulated transcription of spo0A and associated with the spo0A promoter region in vivo. Expression of spo0A from a heterologous promoter in a spo0J null mutant restored Spo0A levels and partly bypassed the sporulation and gene expression defects. Soj did not appear to significantly affect phosphorylation of Spo0A. Thus, in the absence of Spo0J, Soj inhibits sporulation and sporulation gene expression by inhibiting accumulation of the activator protein Spo0A and by acting downstream of Spo0A to inhibit gene expression directly.    We have performed a computational analysis of DNA structural features in 18 fully sequenced prokaryotic genomes using models for DNA curvature, DNA flexibility, and DNA stability. The structural values that are computed for the Escherichia coli chromosome are significantly different from (and generally more extreme than) that expected from the nucleotide composition. To aid this analysis, we have constructed tools that plot structural measures for all positions in a long DNA sequence (e.g. an entire chromosome) in the form of color-coded wheels (http://www.cbs.dtu. dk/services/GenomeAtlas/). We find that these &quot;structural atlases&quot; are useful for the discovery of interesting features that may then be investigated in more depth using statistical methods. From investigation of the E. coli structural atlas, we discovered a genome-wide trend, where an extended region encompassing the terminus displays a high of level curvature, a low level of flexibility, and a low degree of helix stability. The same situation is found in the distantly related Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis, suggesting that the phenomenon is biologically relevant. Based on a search for long DNA segments where all the independent structural measures agree, we have found a set of 20 regions with identical and very extreme structural properties. Due to their strong inherent curvature, we suggest that these may function as topological domain boundaries by efficiently organizing plectonemically supercoiled DNA. Interestingly, we find that in practically all the investigated eubacterial and archaeal genomes, there is a trend for promoter DNA being more curved, less flexible, and less stable than DNA in coding regions and in intergenic DNA without promoters. This trend is present regardless of the absolute levels of the structural parameters, and we suggest that this may be related to the requirement for helix unwinding during initiation of transcription, or perhaps to the previously observed location of promoters at the apex of plectonemically supercoiled DNA. We have also analyzed the structural similarities between groups of genes by clustering all RNA and protein-encoding genes in E. coli, based on the average structural parameters. We find that most ribosomal genes (protein-encoding as well as rRNA genes) cluster together, and we suggest that DNA structure may play a role in the transcription of these highly expressed genes. Copyright 2000 Academic Press.    Bacillus subtilis synthesizes polyamines by decarboxylating arginine to agmatine, which is subsequently hydrolysed to putrescine. Spermidine is synthesized from putrescine and decarboxylated S-adenosylmethionine (dAdoMet). In Gram-negative bacteria and in eukaryotes, AdoMet is decarboxylated by an unusual &apos;pyruvoyl&apos; AdoMet decarboxylase (SpeD), the catalytic pyruvoyl moiety of which is generated by serinolysis of an internal serine with self-cleavage of the protein at the upstream peptide bond. Neither the Gram-positive bacterial nor the archaeal counterpart of the Escherichia coli SpeD enzyme were known. We have identified the corresponding B. subtilis speD gene (formely ytcF). Heterologous expression of the cognate Methanococcus jannaschii protein, MJ0315, demonstrated that it displays the same activity as B. subtilis SpeD, indicating that spermidine biosynthesis in Gram-positive bacteria and in archaea follows a pathway very similar to that of Gram-negatives and eukarya. In B. subtilis, transcription of speD is modulated by spermidine and methionine. Its expression is high under usual growth conditions. In contrast, the SpeD protein self-cleaves slowly in vitro, a noticeable difference with its archaeal counterpart. Under certain growth conditions (minimal medium containing succinate and glutamate as a carbon source), speD is co-transcribed with gapB, the gene encoding glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, an enzyme required for gluconeogenesis. This observation may couple polyamine metabolism to sulphur and carbon metabolism by a so far unknown mechanism.    The biosynthetic gene cluster (12.3 kb) of mersacidin, a lanthionine-containing antimicrobial peptide, is located on the chromosome of the producer, Bacillus sp. strain HIL Y-85,54728 in a region that corresponds to 348 degrees on the chromosome of Bacillus subtilis 168. It consists of 10 open reading frames and contains, in addition to the previously described mersacidin structural gene mrsA (G. Bierbaum, H. Brotz, K.-P. Koller, and H.-G. Sahl, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 127:121-126, 1995), two genes, mrsM and mrsD, coding for enzymes involved in posttranslational modification of the prepeptide; one gene, mrsT, coding for a transporter with an associated protease domain; and three genes, mrsF, mrsG, and mrsE, encoding a group B ABC transporter that could be involved in producer self-protection. Additionally, three regulatory genes are part of the gene cluster, i.e., mrsR2 and mrsK2, which encode a two-component regulatory system which seems to be necessary for the transcription of the mrsFGE operon, and mrsR1, which encodes a protein with similarity to response regulators. Transcription of mrsA sets in at early stationary phase (between 8 and 16 h of culture).    A bile salt hydrolase (BSH) was isolated from Bifidobacterium longum SBT2928, purified, and characterized. Furthermore, we describe for the first time cloning and analysis of the gene encoding BSH (bsh) in a member of the genus Bifidobacterium. The enzyme has a native molecular weight of 125,000 to 130,000 and a subunit molecular weight of 35,024, as determined from the deduced amino acid sequence, indicating that the enzyme is a tetramer. The pH optimum of B. longum BSH is between 5 and 7, and the temperature optimum is 40 degrees C. The enzyme is strongly inhibited by thiol enzyme inhibitors, indicating that a Cys residue is likely to be involved in the catalytic reaction. The BSH of B. longum can hydrolyze all six major human bile salts and at least two animal bile salts. A slight preference for glycine-conjugated bile acids was detected based on both the specificity and the K(m) values. The nucleotide sequence of bsh was determined and used for homology studies, transcript analysis, and construction and analysis of various mutants. The levels of homology with BSH of other bacteria and with penicillin V acylase (PVA) of Bacillus sphaericus were high. On the basis of the similarity of BSH and PVA, whose crystal structure has been elucidated, BSH can be classified as an N-terminal nucleophile hydrolase with Cys as the N-terminal amino acid. This classification was confirmed by the fact that a Cys1Ala exchange by site-directed mutagenesis resulted in an inactive protein. Reverse transcription-PCR experiments revealed that bsh is part of an operon containing at least two genes, bsh and glnE (GlnE is glutamine synthetase adenylyltransferase). Two UV-induced BSH-negative mutants and one spontaneous BSH-negative mutant were isolated from B. longum SBT2928 cultures and characterized. These mutants had point mutations that inactivated bsh by premature termination, frameshift, or amino acid exchange.    Protein p6 of Bacillus subtilis phage theta29 is involved in the initiation of viral DNA replication and transcription by forming a multimeric nucleoprotein complex with the phage DNA. Based on this, together with its abundance and its capacity to bind to the whole viral genome, it has been proposed to be a viral histone-like protein. Protein p6 is in a monomer-dimer-oligomer equilibrium association. We have identified protein p6 mutants deficient in self-association by testing random mutants obtained by degenerated polymerase chain reaction in an in vivo assay for dimer formation. The mutations were mainly clustered in two regions located at the N terminus, and the central part of the protein. Site-directed single mutants, corresponding to those found in vivo, have been constructed and purified. Mutant p6A44V, located at the central part of the protein, showed an impaired dimer formation ability, and a reduced capacity to bind DNA and to activate the initiation of O29 DNA replication. Mutant p6I8T has at least 10-fold reduced self-association capacity, does not bind DNA nor activate O29 DNA initiation of replication. C-terminal deletion mutants showed an enhanced dimer formation capacity. The highly acidic tail, removed in these mutants, is proposed to modulate the protein p6 self-association.    Plasmid pIP501 encoded transcriptional repressor CopR is one of the two regulators of plasmid copy number. It acts as a transcriptional repressor at the essential repR promoter. Furthermore, CopR prevents convergent transcription from the repR and the antisense promoter, thereby indirectly increasing the amount of antisense-RNA, the second regulatory component. CopR binds as a dimer to a nearly palindromic operator with the consensus sequence 5&apos;CGTG. Previously, a CopR structural model was built and used to identify amino acids involved in DNA binding. These data showed that CopR is a HTH protein belonging to the lambda repressor superfamily and allowed the identification of two amino acids involved in specific DNA recognition. Here, we describe site-directed mutagenesis in combination with EMSA, dimerization studies using sedimentation equilibrium, and CD measurements to verify the model predictions concerning amino acids involved in dimerization. With this approach, the dimeric interface could be located between amino acids I44 and L62. F5 located at the N-terminus is additionally required for proper folding, and could, therefore, not be unequivocally assigned to the dimeric interface. CD measurements at protein concentrations well below K(Dimer) revealed that the monomer of CopR is folded.    Deletion of 10 evolutionarily conserved amino acids from the beta subunit of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase leads to a mutant enzyme that is unable to efficiently hold onto DNA. Open promoter complexes formed by the mutant enzyme are in rapid equilibrium with closed complexes and, unlike the wild-type complexes, are highly sensitive to the DNA competitor heparin (Martin, E., Sagitov, V., Burova, E., Nikiforov, V., and Goldfarb, A. (1992) J. Biol. Chem. 267, 20175-20180). Here we show that despite this instability, the mutant enzyme forms partially open complexes at temperatures as low as 0 degrees C when the wild-type complex is fully closed. Thus, the two hallmarks of the open promoter complex, the stability toward a challenge with DNA competitors and the sensitivity toward low temperature, can be uncoupled by mutation and may be independent in the wild-type complex. We use the high resolution structure of Thermus aquaticus RNA polymerase core to build a functional model of promoter complex formation that accounts for the observed defects of the E. coli RNA polymerase mutants.    Processing of pro-sigma(K) in the mother cell compartment of sporulating Bacillus subtilis involves SpoIVFB and is governed by a signal from the forespore. SpoIVFB has an HEXXH motif characteristic of metalloproteases embedded in one of its transmembrane segments. Several conservative single amino acid changes in the HEXXH motif abolished function. However, changing the glutamic acid residue to aspartic acid, or changing the isoleucine residue that precedes the motif to proline, permitted SpoIVFB function. Only one other putative metalloprotease, site 2 protease has been shown to tolerate aspartic acid rather than glutamic acid in its HEXXH sequence. Site 2 protease and SpoIVFB share a second region of similarity with a family of putative membrane metalloproteases. A conservative change in this region of SpoIVFB abolished function. Interestingly, SpoIVFA increased the accumulation of certain mutant SpoIVFB proteins but was unnecessary for accumulation of wild-type SpoIVFB.    The Bacillus subtilis sbo-alb operon contains sboA, the structural gene for the bacteriocin subtilosin, and the alb genes required for subtilosin production. Transcription from the sbo-alb promoter is highly induced by oxygen limitation. The transcriptional regulation of the sbo-alb operon is under dual control involving the transition state regulator AbrB and the two-component regulatory proteins ResD and ResE.    Bacillus subtilis grows in the absence of oxygen using nitrate ammonification and various fermentation processes. Lactate, acetate, and 2,3-butanediol were identified in the growth medium as the major anaerobic fermentation products by using high-performance liquid chromatography. Lactate formation was found to be dependent on the lctEP locus, encoding lactate dehydrogenase and a putative lactate permease. Mutation of lctE results in drastically reduced anaerobic growth independent of the presence of alternative electron acceptors, indicating the importance of NADH reoxidation by lactate dehydrogenase for the overall anaerobic energy metabolism. Anaerobic formation of 2,3-butanediol via acetoin involves acetolactate synthase and decarboxylase encoded by the alsSD operon. Mutation of alsSD has no significant effect on anaerobic growth. Anaerobic acetate synthesis from acetyl coenzyme A requires phosphotransacetylase encoded by pta. Similar to the case for lctEP, mutation of pta significantly reduces anaerobic fermentative and respiratory growth. The expression of both lctEP and alsSD is strongly induced under anaerobic conditions. Anaerobic lctEP and alsSD induction was found to be partially dependent on the gene encoding the redox regulator Fnr. The observed fnr dependence might be the result of Fnr-induced arfM (ywiD) transcription and subsequent lctEP and alsSD activation by the regulator ArfM (YwiD). The two-component regulatory system encoded by resDE is also involved in anaerobic lctEP induction. No direct resDE influence on the redox regulation of alsSD was observed. The alternative electron acceptor nitrate represses anaerobic lctEP and alsSD transcription. Nitrate repression requires resDE- and fnr-dependent expression of narGHJI, encoding respiratory nitrate reductase. The gene alsR, encoding a regulator potentially responding to changes of the intracellular pH and to acetate, is essential for anaerobic lctEP and alsSD expression. In agreement with its known aerobic function, no obvious oxygen- or nitrate-dependent pta regulation was observed. A model for the regulation of the anaerobic fermentation genes in B. subtilis is proposed.    Four genes [sspI, sspK, sspM, and sspO (originally called cotK)] encoding minor small, acid-soluble proteins (SASP) unique to spores of Bacillus subtilis are expressed only in the forespore compartment of sporulating cells of this organism. The sspI, sspK and sspM genes are monocistronic, while sspO is the first gene in a likely operon with sspP (originally called cotL), which also encodes a putative very small protein. Transcription of these genes is primarily, if not exclusively, by RNA polymerase with the forespore-specific sigma factor, sigma(G). Sequences centered 10 and 35nt upstream of the 5&apos;-ends of sspI, sspK, sspM and sspO also show homology to the -10 and -35 sequences recognized by sigma(G). Mutations deleting these genes cause the loss of the appropriate SASP from spores, and the sspK, sspM and sspO (and likely sspP) mutations had no discernable effect on sporulation, spore properties or spore germination. Loss of sspI also had no effect on sporulation, spore properties or spore germination, but DeltasspI spores had a significant defect in spore outgrowth.    Spo0A is a two-domain response regulator required for sporulation initiation in Bacillus subtilis. Studies on response regulators have focused on the activity of each domain, but very little is known about the mechanism by which the regulatory domain inhibits the activator domain. In this study, we created a single amino acid substitution in the regulatory domain, D75S, which resulted in a dramatic decrease in sporulation in vivo. In vitro studies with the purified Spo0AD75S protein demonstrated that phosphorylation and DNA binding were comparable with wild type Spo0A. However, the mutant was unable to stimulate transcription by final sigma(A)-RNA polymerase from the Spo0A-dependent spoIIG operon promoter. We suggest that the amino acid Asp(75) and/or the region within which it resides, the alpha3-beta4 loop, are involved in the inhibitory interaction between the regulatory and activator domains of Spo0A.    Bacillus subtilis possesses two similar putative phosphorylating glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) encoding genes, gap (renamed gapA) and gapB. A gapA mutant was unable to grow on glycolytic carbon sources, although it developed as well as the wild-type strain on gluconeogenic carbon sources. A gapB mutant showed the opposite phenotype. Purified GapB showed a 50-fold higher GAPDHase activity with NADP(+) than with NAD(+), with K(m) values of 0.86 and 5.7 mm, respectively. lacZ reporter gene fusions revealed that the gapB gene is transcribed during gluconeogenesis and repressed during glycolysis. Conversely, gapA transcription is 5-fold higher under glycolytic conditions than during gluconeogenesis. GAPDH activity assays in crude extracts of wild-type and mutant strains confirmed this differential expression pattern at the enzymatic level. Genetic analyses demonstrated that gapA transcription is repressed by the yvbQ (renamed cggR) gene product and indirectly stimulated by CcpA. Thus, the same enzymatic step is catalyzed in B. subtilis by two enzymes specialized, through the regulation of their synthesis and their enzymatic characteristics, either in catabolism (GapA) or in anabolism (GapB). Such a dual enzymatic system for this step of the central carbon metabolism is described for the first time in a nonphotosynthetic eubacterium, but genomic analyses suggest that it could be a widespread feature.    Oenococcus oeni is a lactic acid bacterium which is able to grow in wine and perform malolactic fermentation. To survive and grow in such a harsh environment as wine, O. oeni uses several mechanisms of resistance including stress protein synthesis. The molecular characterisation of three stress genes hsp18, clpX, trxA encoding for a small heat shock protein, an ATPase regulation component of ClpP protease and a thioredoxin, respectively, allow us to suggest the existence in O. oeni of multiple regulation mechanisms as is the case in Bacillus subtilis. One common feature of these genes is that they are expressed under the control of housekeeping promoters. The expression of these genes as a function of growth is significantly different. Surprisingly, the clpX gene, which is induced by heat shock, was highly expressed in the early phase of growth. In addition to stress protein synthesis, adaptation to the acid pH of wine requires efficient cellular systems to extrude protons. Using inhibitors specific for different types of ATPases, we demonstrated the existence of H+-ATPase and P-type ATPase.    During sporulation of Bacillus subtilis, spore coat proteins encoded by cot genes are expressed in the mother cell and deposited on the forespore. Transcription of the cotB, cotC, and cotX genes by final sigma(K) RNA polymerase is activated by a small, DNA-binding protein called GerE. The promoter region of each of these genes has two GerE binding sites. 5&apos; deletions that eliminated the more upstream GerE site decreased expression of lacZ fused to cotB and cotX by approximately 80% and 60%, respectively but had no effect on cotC-lacZ expression. The cotC-lacZ fusion was expressed later during sporulation than the other two fusions. Primer extension analysis confirmed that cotB mRNA increases first during sporulation, followed by cotX and cotC mRNAs over a 2-h period. In vitro transcription experiments suggest that the differential pattern of cot gene expression results from the combined action of GerE and another transcription factor, SpoIIID. A low concentration of GerE activated cotB transcription by final sigma(K) RNA polymerase, whereas a higher concentration was needed to activate transcription of cotX or cotC. SpoIIID at low concentration repressed cotC transcription, whereas a higher concentration only partially repressed cotX transcription and had little effect on cotB transcription. DNase I footprinting showed that SpoIIID binds strongly to two sites in the cotC promoter region, binds weakly to one site in the cotX promoter, and does not bind specifically to cotB. We propose that late in sporulation the rising level of GerE and the falling level of SpoIIID, together with the position and affinity of binding sites for these transcription factors in cot gene promoters, dictates the timing and level of spore coat protein synthesis, ensuring optimal assembly of the protein shell on the forespore surface.    Transcriptional analysis of five different regions of the Bacillus subtilis 168 genome, comprising a total of 175 kb encoding newly identified genes, was carried out using the RT-PCR technique as part of the functional analysis of the whole genome of this bacterium. Amplification of mRNA fragments allowed the detection of both highly and poorly transcribed genes covering 81% of putative ORFs, and also the monitoring of variations in the expression level among genes differentially expressed during particular bacterial growth phases.    During the stage of engulfment in the Bacillus subtilis spore formation pathway, the larger mother cell engulfs the smaller forespore. We have tested the role of forespore-specific gene expression in engulfment using two separate approaches. First, using an assay that unambiguously detects sporangia that have completed engulfment, we found that a mutant lacking the only forespore-expressed engulfment protein identified thus far, SpoIIQ, is able to efficiently complete engulfment under certain sporulation conditions. However, we have found that the mutant is defective, under all conditions, in the expression of the late-forespore-specific transcription factor sigma(G); thus, SpoIIQ is essential for spore production. Second, to determine if engulfment could proceed in the absence of forespore-specific gene expression, we made use of a strain in which activation of the mother cell-specific sigma factor sigma(E) was uncoupled from forespore-specific gene expression. Remarkably, engulfment occurred in the complete absence of sigma(F)-directed gene expression under the same conditions permissive for engulfment in the absence of SpoIIQ. Our results demonstrate that forespore-specific gene expression is not essential for engulfment, suggesting that the machinery used to move the membranes around the forespore is within the mother cell.    CcdA is known to be required for the synthesis of c-type cytochromes in Bacillus subtilis, but the exact function of this membrane protein is not known. We show that CcdA also plays a role in spore synthesis. The expression of ccdA and the two downstream genes yneI and yneJ was analyzed. There is a promoter for each gene, but there is only one transcription terminator, located after the yneJ gene. The promoter for ccdA was found to be weak and was active mainly during the transition from exponential growth to stationary phase. The promoters for yneI and yneJ were both active in the exponential growth phase. The levels of the CcdA and YneJ proteins in the membrane were consistent with the observed promoter activities. The ccdA promoter activity was independent of whether the ccdA-yneI-yneJ gene products were absent or overproduced in the cell. It is shown that the four known cytochromes c in B. subtilis and the YneI and YneJ proteins are not required for sporulation. The combined data from analysis of sporulation-specific sigma factor activity, resistance properties of spores, and spore morphology indicate that CcdA deficiency affects stage V in sporulation. We conclude that CcdA, YneI, and YneJ are functionally unrelated proteins and that the role of CcdA in cytochrome c and spore synthesis probably relates to sulfhydryl redox chemistry on the outer surface of the cytoplasmic membrane.    Obg, an essential GTP binding protein of Bacillus subtilis, is necessary for stress activation of the sigma(B) transcription factor. We investigated Obg&apos;s cellular associations by differential centrifugation of crude B. subtilis extracts, using an anti-Obg antibody as a probe to monitor Obg during the fractionation, and by fluorescent microscopy of a B. subtilis strain in which Obg was fused to green fluorescent protein. The results indicated that Obg is part of a large cytoplasmic complex. In subsequent analyses, Obg coeluted with ribosomal subunits during gel filtration of B. subtilis lysates on Sephacryl S-400 and specifically bound to ribosomal protein L13 in an affinity blot assay. Probing the gel filtration fractions with antibodies specific for sigma(B) and its coexpressed regulators (Rsb proteins) revealed coincident elution of the upstream components of the sigma(B) stress activation pathway (RsbR, -S, and -T) with Obg and the ribosomal subunits. The data implicate ribosome function as a possible mediator of the activity of Obg and the stress induction of sigma(B).    The bacterial transcription factor sigma(N) (sigma-N, sigma-54, RpoN) confers upon RNA polymerase (RNAP) properties distinct from those of the major house-keeping form of RNAP, which contains sigma(70) (sigma-70, RpoD). Transcription by RNAP containing sigma(N) is subject to enhancer-dependent regulation. Far from being an &apos;oddity&apos; or &apos;exception to the rule&apos;, the occurrence of sigma(N) in the genome sequences of such diverse bacteria as Aquifex aeolicus, Bacillus subtilis, Chlamydia spp. and Borrelia burgdorferi argues for its biological importance. The availability of complete genome sequences of several (eu)bacteria offers an opportunity to extend our understanding of this special form of transcriptional regulation. By scanning their genome sequences, new functions have been predicted for enhancer-dependent transcription in A. aeolicus, Chlamydia trachomatis, Escherichia coli, Treponema pallidum and B. burgdorferi.    The Bacillus subtilis genome sequencing project [Kunst et al., Nature 390 (1997) 249-256] identified ywhE as a gene that potentially encodes a high-molecular-weight class A penicillin-binding protein. Analysis of the expression of a translational ywhE-lacZ fusion showed that ywhE expression is sporulation-specific, and is controlled predominantly by the forespore-specific sigma factor sigma(F), and to a lesser extent by sigma(G). Primer extension analysis identified two transcription start sites located 26 and 27 nucleotides upstream of the ywhE translational initiation codon. Sequences located in the -10 and -35 regions relative to the transcription start sites showed good homology to the consensus sequences for promoter elements of sigma(F)-dependent genes. An insertional mutation in ywhE had no significant effect on growth, morphology, and sporulation, and ywhE spores had normal heat-resistance, cortex structure, and germination and outgrowth properties. However, overexpression of ywhE in Escherichia coli resulted in cell lysis.    We report that the expression of the Bacillus megaterium bmlP1 gene is subject to negative regulation by the bmlP1 3&apos; flanking region. This repression occurred both in B. megaterium and in Escherichia coli. When the bmlP1 promoter was replaced with a heterologous promoter or when the orientation of the bmlP1 3&apos; flanking region was reversed, the inhibitory effect was still observed. However, the bmlP1 3&apos; flanking region was unable to exert repression on a heterologous gene when fused downstream in either orientation, and it was incapable of acting in trans. Dot blot and Northern blot analyses revealed that the repression occurred at the RNA level. Deletion analysis showed that the regulatory site responsible for the repression is located within a 116-bp region immediately following the bmlP1 gene. Possible mechanisms for this repression are discussed.    We isolated a Bacillus subtilis natto strain, designated OK2, from a lot of commercial fermented soybean natto and studied its ability to undergo natural competence development using a comG-lacZ fusion at the amyE locus. Although transcription of the late competence genes was not detected in the B. subtilis natto strain OK2 during competence development, these genes were constitutively transcribed in the OK2 strain carrying either the mecA or the clpC mutation derived from B. subtilis 168. In addition, both OK2 mutants exhibited high transformation frequencies, comparable with that observed for B. subtilis 168. Moreover, as expected from these results, overproduction of ComK derived from strain 168 in strain OK2 resulted in a high transformation frequency as well as in induction of the late competence genes. These results clearly indicated that ComK produced in both the mecA and clpC mutants of strain OK2 (ComK(OK2)) could activate the transcription of the whole set of late competence genes and suggested that ComK(OK2) was not activated in strain OK2 during competence development. We therefore sequenced the comS gene of OK2 and compared it with that of 168. The comS(OK2) had a single-base change, resulting in the replacement of Ser (strain 168) by Cys (strain OK2) at position 11.    To test the hypothesis that characteristic cytokine responses occur in stimulated porcine lymph nodes (LNs), lymph node efferent ducts were surgically cannulated. Efferent lymph (EL) leukocytes were collected before and after stimulation of LNs with mitogens [bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or phytohemagglutinin-P(PHA-P)] and antigens [hen egg white lysozyme (HEWL) or purified protein derivative of tuberculin (PPD)]. Cytokine mRNA expression was evaluated by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (Q-RT-PCR). Interleukin (IL)-1alpha was predominantly produced after all stimuli except for HEWL after which tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha message was dominant. None of the stimuli induced message for IL-2, IL-4 or IL-8. Other cytokine mRNAs were produced in variable amounts and percentage of overall production of each cytokine message was in the following descending rank: LPS: IL-1alpha, TNF-alpha, interferon (IFN)-gamma, IL-10, IL-12-p35, IL-6, IL-12-p40 and TNF-beta; PHA-P: IL-1alpha, TNF-alpha, IL-10, IFN-gamma, IL-12-p40 and TNF-beta; HEWL: TNF-alpha, IL-1alpha, IFN-gamma, IL-10, IL-6, IL-12-p40, TNF-beta and IL-12-p35 and PPD: IL-1alpha, IFN-gamma, TNF-alpha and IL-10. Time course response of cytokines revealed early (IL-1alpha, 10, TNF-alpha) and intermediate (IL-12-p40, TNF-beta, IFN-gamma) responses for PHA-P and early (IL-1alpha, 6, 10, IL-12-p35, IL-12-p40, TNF-alpha), intermediate (TNF-beta, IFN-gamma) and late (IL-1alpha, 6) for LPS. Cytokine mRNA response induced by HEWL was early (IL-alpha, IFN-gamma), intermediate (IL-10, IL-12-p40, TNF-beta), late (IL-1alpha, IL-12-p35) and very late (IL-1alpha, 6, 10, IL-12-p40, TNF-alpha). In Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) sensitized pigs, stimulation of LNs with PPD induced message for IL-1alpha, 10, TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma which peaked at 24h. Cytokine mRNAs varied by stimulus and differed for antibody and cell-mediated immune response.    The Bacillus subtilis yqhN gene encodes a metalloregulatory protein distantly related to the Corynebacterium diphtheriae diphtheria toxin repressor (DtxR). While DtxR mediates the iron-dependent repression of iron uptake, we demonstrate that yqhN (herein renamed mntR) encodes a manganese modulated regulator of manganese transport. An mntR mutant strain is sensitive to both manganese and cadmium, suggesting that the transport of these metals is derepressed. We selected Tn10 insertions that suppress the Mn(II) sensitivity of the mntR mutant or that increase the Cd(II) tolerance of wild-type cells, and in both cases we recovered insertions in mntH (formerly ydaR). MntH is a member of the NRAMP family of proton-coupled, metal ion transporters. MntR also regulates expression of a Mn(II) ABC transporter (MntABCD). The MntH and MntABCD transporters are both selectively repressed by Mn(II) and this regulation requires MntR. In high Mn(II) conditions, MntR functions as a Mn(II)-dependent repressor of mntH transcription. In contrast, MntR acts as a positive regulator of the mntABCD operon under low Mn(II) growth conditions. Biochemical studies demonstrate that MntR binding to the mntH control region requires Mn(II), while interaction with the mntABCD control region does not depend on Mn(II).    Spo0A is a two domain response regulator, a key protein in the initiation of sporulation of Bacillus subtilis. This protein controls a number of changes in gene expression that occur during the transition from stationary phase to the onset of sporulation. The phosphorylated form of Spo0A influences the transcription of a specific set of genes. In addition to others, it represses abrB and activates spoIIA and spoIIE transcription. Although the N-terminal phosphoacceptor domain is well characterised, there is limited information on the C-terminal, DNA-binding domain. Comparisons of Spo0A homologues from a number of Bacillus and Clostridium species show that the C-terminal domain contains three highly conserved regions. In this study, we have investigated the influence of spo0A mutations mapping within the C-terminal domain on transcription from the abrB, spoIIA and spoIIE promoters using lacZ fusions. Our results indicate that described mutations can be part of signalling between N- and C-terminal domains of the protein. Also, the increased expression observed from the spoIIE promoter in some Spo0A mutants might result from a stabilising function of these mutations on the transcriptional apparatus utilising sigma(A).    SpoIIE is a bifunctional protein with two critical roles in the establishment of cell fate in Bacillus subtilis. First, SpoIIE is needed for the normal formation of the asymmetrically positioned septum that forms early in sporulation and separates the mother cell from the prespore compartment. Secondly, SpoIIE is essential for the activation of the first compartment-specific transcription factor sigma(F) in the prespore. After initiation of sporulation, SpoIIE localizes to the potential asymmetric cell division sites near one or both cell poles. Localization of SpoIIE was shown to be dependent on the essential cell division protein FtsZ. To understand how SpoIIE is targeted to the asymmetric septum we have now analysed its interaction with FtsZ in vitro. Using the yeast two-hybrid system and purified FtsZ, and full-length and truncated SpoIIE proteins, we demonstrate that the two proteins interact directly and that domain II and possibly domain I of SpoIIE are required for the interaction. Moreover, we show that SpoIIE interacts with itself and suggest that this self-interaction plays a role in assembly of SpoIIE into the division machinery.    Iron is an essential nutrient for the survival and pathogenesis of bacteria, but relatively little is known regarding its transport and regulation in staphylococci. Based on the known sequences of ferric-uptake regulatory (fur) genes from several Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, a fragment containing the fur homologue was cloned from a genomic library of Staphylococcus aureus RN450. Nucleotide sequence analysis of this fragment revealed the presence of a 447 bp ORF that encodes a putative 149 aa polypeptide with an apparent molecular mass of 17 kDa. A putative ferrichrome-uptake (fhu) operon, containing the conserved Fur-binding sequences (Fur box) in the promoter region, was also cloned from the same S. aureus library. To characterize the impact of Fur on the fhu operon, fur was cloned, overexpressed as a His-tagged protein and purified by Ni2+-affinity column chromatography. The recombinant protein was digested with enterokinase to remove the His tag. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays indicated that Fur binds to the promoter region of the fhu operon in the presence of divalent cations. Fur also interacted with the promoter region of the recently reported sir operon that has been proposed to constitute a siderophore-transport system in S. aureus. The DNase I-protection assay revealed that Fur specifically binds to the Fur box located in the promoter region of the fhu operon. The primer-extension reaction indicated that the transcription-start site of the fhu operon was located inside the Fur box. S. aureus fur partially complemented a fur- mutation in Bacillus subtilis. The data suggest that Fur regulates iron-transport processes in S. aureus.    Within the framework of the international project &apos;The functional analysis of the Bacillus subtilis genome&apos; in Japan and Europe, the gene expression and transcription organization of the gntZ-ywaA region (160 kb) of the B. subtilis genome has been systematically analysed. First, all unanalysed genes comprising more than 80 amino acids (125 genes) in this region were inactivated through integration of plasmid pMUTIN. No essential gene was found which could not be inactivated. All the integrants grew normally in both nutrient sporulation medium and glucose minimal medium. But an integrant in the yxbG gene exhibited an oligosporogenic phenotype in the nutrient sporulation medium. The synthesis of beta-galactosidase was examined, as a reporter for expression of the inactivated genes, during growth and sporulation in the two media. The results indicated that 36% of the promoters were inactive when cells were grown in at least one of these two media. Furthermore, the transcription of the 119 genes in this region was analysed by Northern blotting, resulting in a transcription map. The results indicate that the gntZ-ywaA region contains at least 24 polycistronic operons, including several published ones. The operons newly found in this work are yxaAB, yxaGH, yxaJKL, yxbBA-yxnB-asnH-yxaM, yxbCD, yxcED, yxdJK, yxeFGH, yxeKLMNOPQ, yxeR-yxxB, hutPHUIGM, bgIPH-yxiE, wapA-yxxG, yxiM-deaD, katB-yxiS, yxjCDEF, yxjJI and yxkF-mmsX.    Quorum sensing occurs at high cell density in many microorganisms. It regulates specialized processes such as genetic competence, bioluminescence, virulence, and sporulation. However, recent evidence suggests that quorum-sensing may play a more central role in the physiology of bacteria, where quorum-sensing pathways converge with starvation-sensing pathways to regulate cell entry into stationary phase.    The genomic materials from some Bacillus subtilis bacteriophages are found to contain 5-(hydroxymethyl)-2&apos;-deoxyuridine in place of thymine. Phage-encoded proteins such as transcription factor 1 specifically and preferentially bind to the minor grooves of these hmU-containing DNA but not to thymine-containing DNA. Data from electrophoretic mobility shift assays suggest that the inherent, localized flexibility of hmU-DNA, which is sequence-specific, is responsible for its discriminative binding. We discuss here, from the NMR-derived structural point of view, how differential DNA flexibility can contribute to specific binding of TF1 to hmU-DNA. Copyright 2000 John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc.    Computer analysis of the Bacillus subtilis genome sequence revealed a gene with no previously attributed function, yhaG, specifying a transcript containing a presumptive binding site for the tryptophan-activated regulatory protein, TRAP. The presumptive TRAP binding site overlaps the yhaG Shine-Dalgarno sequence and translation initiation region. TRAP was shown to regulate expression of yhaG translationally. Production of the yhaG transcript in vivo was found to compete for the binding of TRAP to other known TRAP binding sites. YhaG is likely to be a transmembrane protein involved in tryptophan transport.    Adaptive responses of micro-organisms, such as chemotaxis and sporulation, are governed by two-component systems consisting of sensor kinases, that interpret environmental signals, and response regulators which activate the appropriate physiological responses. Signal transduction via response regulator proteins is mediated through transient phosphorylation of aspartic acid residues. In Spo0A, the key regulator of development (sporulation) in Bacillus, phosphorylation of the N-terminal receiver domain (N-Spo0A) at aspartate-55 switches on the transcription activation functions residing in the C-terminal effector domain. Here we report the crystal structure of N-Spo0A from Bacillus stearothermophilus at 1.6 A spacing, revealing a dimer formed by an alpha-helix swap. Comparison of this structure with the recently described structure of phosphorylated N-Spo0A shows that dimer formation results from a cis-trans isomerization of the Lys106--Pro107 peptide bond. The quaternary reorganization is associated with alterations in the active site stereochemistry which may have implications for signalling. Remarkably, this 3-D domain swapped N-Spo0A dimer has an identical topology to a hypothetical CheY-like dimer, recently proposed as an intermediate in the evolution of the family of periplasmic substrate binding proteins. Copyright 2000 Academic Press.    A variant of the bacteriophage SPO1-encoded transcription factor 1 (TF1) with two site-specific mutations (E15G and T32I) was shown to be more thermally stable and bind DNA more tightly compared to the wild-type protein. In order to understand the biochemical mechanisms underlying these properties, we are engaged in determining the solution structures of this mutant alone and in complex with DNA using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. The first phase of this project is reported here, as we have completed most of the backbone and sidechain sequential NMR assignments of the mutant protein, TF1-G15/I32. Insights derived from the (1)H, (15)N and (13)C chemical shifts and from the secondary structure analysis provide us with an explanation for the noted increase in thermal stability of TF1-G15/I32. Compared to the structure of the wild-type protein, the beta-sheet and the C-terminal helix remain largely unaffected whereas the mutations cause great changes in the first two helices and their enclosed loop. Specifically, we have found that the second helix is extended by one residue at its N-terminus and rotated in a way that allows Ala-37 to interact with Tyr-94 of the C-terminal helix. The loop has been found to become more rigid as a result of hydrophobic interactions between the flanking second and first helices and also between the second helix and the loop itself. Furthermore, the T32I mutation allows tighter packing between the second helix and the beta-sheet. Collectively, these changes contribute to a more tightly associated dimer and hence, to a greater thermal stability.    Chromosome replication is not a uniform and continuous process. Replication forks can be slowed down or arrested by DNA secondary structures, specific protein-DNA complexes, specific DNA-RNA hybrids, or interactions between the replication and transcription machineries. Replication arrest has important implications for the topology of replication intermediates and can trigger homologous and illegitimate recombination. Thus, replication arrest may be a key factor in genome instability. Several examples of these phenomena are reviewed here.    The gerP1 transposon insertion mutation of Bacillus cereus is responsible for a defect in the germination response of spores to both L-alanine and inosine. The mutant is blocked at an early stage, before loss of heat resistance or release of dipicolinate, and the efficiency of colony formation on nutrient agar from spores is reduced fivefold. The protein profiles of alkaline-extracted spore coats and the spore cortex composition are unchanged in the mutant. Permeabilization of gerP mutant spores by coat extraction procedures removes the block in early stages of germination, although a consequence of the permeabilization procedure in both wild type and mutant is that late germination events are not complete. The complete hexacistronic operon that includes the site of insertion has been cloned and sequenced. Four small proteins encoded by the operon (GerPA, GerPD, GerPB, and GerPF) are related in sequence. A homologous operon (yisH-yisC) can be found in the Bacillus subtilis genome sequence; null mutations in yisD and yisF, constructed by integrational inactivation, result in a mutant phenotype similar to that seen in B. cereus, though somewhat less extreme and equally repairable by spore permeabilization. Normal rates of germination, as estimated by loss of heat resistance, are also restored to a gerP mutant by the introduction of a cotE mutation, which renders the spore coats permeable to lysozyme. The B. subtilis operon is expressed solely during sporulation, and is sigma K-inducible. We hypothesize that the GerP proteins are important as morphogenetic or structural components of the Bacillus spore, with a role in the establishment of normal spore coat structure and/or permeability, and that failure to synthesize these proteins during spore formation limits the opportunity for small hydrophilic organic molecules, like alanine or inosine, to gain access to their normal target, the germination receptor, in the spore.    Transcription of the Bacillus subtilis dra-nupC-pdp operon is repressed by the DeoR repressor protein. The DeoR repressor with an N-terminal His tag was overproduced with a plasmid under control of a phage T5 promoter in Escherichia coli and was purified to near homogeneity by one affinity chromatography step. Gel filtration experimental results showed that native DeoR has a mass of 280 kDa and appears to exist as an octamer. Binding of DeoR to the operator DNA of the dra-nupC-pdp operon was characterized by using an electrophoretic gel mobility shift assay. An apparent dissociation constant of 22 nM was determined for binding of DeoR to operator DNA, and the binding curve indicated that the binding of DeoR to the operator DNA was cooperative. In the presence of low-molecular-weight effector deoxyribose-5-phosphate, the dissociation constant was higher than 1,280 nM. The dissociation constant remained unchanged in the presence of deoxyribose-1-phosphate. DNase I footprinting exhibited a protected region that extends over more than 43 bp, covering a palindrome together with a direct repeat to one half of the palindrome and the nucleotides between them.    The expression of six novel genes located in the region from abrB to spoVC of the Bacillus subtilis chromosome was analyzed, and one of the genes, yabG, had a predicted promoter sequence conserved among SigK-dependent genes. Northern blot analysis revealed that yabG mRNA was first detected from 4 h after the cessation of logarithmic growth (T(4)) in wild-type cells and in a gerE36 (GerE(-)) mutant but not in spoIIAC (SigF(-)), spoIIGAB (SigE(-)), spoIIIG (SigG(-)), and spoIVCB (SigK(-)) mutants. The transcription start point was determined by primer extension analysis; the -10 and -35 regions are very similar to the consensus sequences recognized by SigK-containing RNA polymerase. Inactivation of the yabG gene by insertion of an erythromycin resistance gene did not affect vegetative growth or spore resistance to heat, chloroform, and lysozyme. The germination of yabG spores in L-alanine and in a mixture of L-asparagine, D-glucose, D-fructose, and potassium chloride was also the same as that of wild-type spores. On the other hand, the protein preparation from yabG spores included 15-, 18-, 21-, 23-, 31-, 45-, and 55-kDa polypeptides which were low in or not extracted from wild-type spores under the same conditions. We determined their N-terminal amino acid sequence and found that these polypeptides were CotT, YeeK, YxeE, CotF, YrbA (31 and 45 kDa), and SpoIVA, respectively. The fluorescence of YabG-green fluorescent protein fusion produced in sporulating cells was detectable in the forespores but not in the mother cell compartment under fluorescence microscopy. These results indicate that yabG encodes a sporulation-specific protein which is involved in coat protein composition in B. subtilis.    The trp RNA-binding attenuation protein (TRAP) regulates expression of the Bacillus subtilis trpEDCFBA operon by a novel transcription attenuation mechanism. Tryptophan-activated TRAP binds to the nascent trp leader transcript by interacting with 11 (G/U)AG repeats, 6 of which are present in an antiterminator structure. TRAP binding to these repeats prevents formation of the antiterminator, thereby promoting formation of an overlapping intrinsic terminator. A third stem-loop structure that forms at the extreme 5&apos; end of the trp leader transcript also plays a role in the transcription attenuation mechanism. The 5&apos; stem-loop increases the affinity of TRAP for trp leader RNA. Results from RNA structure mapping experiments demonstrate that the 5&apos; stem-loop consists of a 3-bp lower stem, a 5-by-2 asymmetric internal loop, a 6-bp upper stem, and a hexaloop at the apex of the structure. Footprinting results indicate that TRAP interacts with the 5&apos; stem-loop and that this interaction differs depending on the number of downstream (G/U)AG repeats present in the transcript. Expression studies with trpE&apos;-&apos;lacZ translational fusions demonstrate that TRAP-5&apos; stem-loop interaction is required for proper regulation of the trp operon. 3&apos; RNA boundary experiments indicate that the 5&apos; structure reduces the number of (G/U)AG repeats required for stable TRAP-trp leader RNA association. Thus, TRAP-5&apos; stem-loop interaction may increase the likelihood that TRAP will bind to the (G/U)AG repeats in time to block antiterminator formation.    All spontaneous suppressor mutations obtained from a secA12 sporulation-defective mutant in Bacillus subtilis were localized in highly conserved membrane-spanning regions of SecY. The expression of early sporulation genes, kinA and spo0A encoding a histidine kinase and a transcription regulator for several sporulation genes, respectively, was restored in these suppressor mutants. These results indicate that the secretion function of translocase combined with Sec proteins is required for sporulation in B. subtilis.    We used mini Tn10 transposition to generate a library of Bacillus subtilis insertion mutants, with the goal of identifying and characterizing new competence genes. Two new regulatory genes were identified in our screen: ypuN (also known as rsiX, the anti-sigmaX factor) and ylbF. The disruption of ylbF leads to a dramatic decrease in the expression of comK, encoding the competence transcription factor. Our data show that ylbF positively controls ComK at a post-transcriptional level. It has been reported previously that ComK is degraded in vivo and in vitro by a multimeric protein complex composed of ClpP, ClpC and MecA. This proteolysis is inhibited by the ComS peptide. We show that both the overexpression of comS and the inactivation of mecA individually suffice to bypass the competence phenotype of the ylbF mutation. This mutation does not seem to alter the cellular concentrations of MecA or ClpP, and we propose a role for YlbF in modulating the translation, stability or activity of ComS. In addition to its role in competence, ylbF also appears to regulate sporulation by acting before stage II.    Transport systems for C4-dicarboxylates, such as malate, fumarate and succinate, are poorly understood in Gram-positive bacteria. The whole genome sequence of Bacillus subtilis revealed two genes, ydbE and ydbH, whose deduced products are highly homologous to binding proteins and transporters for C4-dicarboxylates in Gram-negative bacteria. Between ydbE and ydbH, genes ydbF and ydbG encoding a sensor-regulator pair, were located. Inactivation of each one of the ydbEFGH genes caused a deficiency in utilization of fumarate or succinate but not of malate. Expression of ydbH, encoding a putative transporter, was stimulated in a minimal salt medium containing 0-05% yeast extract but repressed by the addition of malate to the medium. Inactivation of the putative sensor-regulator pair or solute-binding protein, ydbFG or ydbE, caused complete loss of ydbH expression. The utilization of fumarate and stimulation of ydbH expression resumed in a ydbE null mutant in which ydbFGH were overproduced. Based on these observations, together with analysis of the sequence similarities of the deduced product, we conclude that YdbH is a C4-dicarboxylate-transport protein and its expression is regulated by a C4-dicarboxylate sensor kinase-regulator pair, YdbF and YdbG. Furthermore, it is suggested that YdbE does not directly participate in transport of C4-dicarboxylates, but plays a sensory role in the ydbF-ydbG two-component system, giving rise to specificity or increased efficiency to the system. Deletion analysis of the promoter region of ydbH revealed that a direct repeat sequence was required for the activation of ydbH expression. A catabolite-responsive element (CRE) was also found in the -10 region of the promoter, suggesting negative regulation by a CRE-binding protein.    Strains of Bacillus subtilis containing a temperature-sensitive tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase produce elevated levels of the tryptophan pathway enzymes, when grown at high temperatures in the presence of excess tryptophan. This increase is because of reduced availability of the tryptophan-activated trp RNA-binding attenuation protein (TRAP). To test the hypothesis that this elevated trp gene expression was caused by the overproduction of a transcript capable of binding and sequestering TRAP, a computer program was designed to search the B. subtilis genome sequence for additional potential TRAP binding sites. A region containing a stretch of (G/A)AG trinucleotide repeats, characteristic of a TRAP binding site, was identified in the yczA-ycbK operon. We show that transcriptional regulation of the yczA-ycbK operon is controlled by the T-box antitermination mechanism in response to the level of uncharged tRNA(Trp), and that the presence of a trpS1 mutant allele increases production of the yczA-ycbK transcript. Elevated yczA-ycbK expression was shown to activate transcription of the trp operon. Deletion of the yczA-ycbK operon abolishes the trpS1 effect on trp gene expression. The purpose of increasing expression of the genes of tryptophan biosynthesis in the trpS mutant would be to provide additional tryptophan to overcome the charged tRNA(Trp) deficiency. Therefore, in B. subtilis, as in Escherichia coli, transcription of the tryptophan biosynthetic genes is regulated in response to changes in the extent of charging of tRNA(Trp) as well as the availability of tryptophan.    This review summarizes the recent discovery of the cupin superfamily (from the Latin term &quot;cupa,&quot; a small barrel) of functionally diverse proteins that initially were limited to several higher plant proteins such as seed storage proteins, germin (an oxalate oxidase), germin-like proteins, and auxin-binding protein. Knowledge of the three-dimensional structure of two vicilins, seed proteins with a characteristic beta-barrel core, led to the identification of a small number of conserved residues and thence to the discovery of several microbial proteins which share these key amino acids. In particular, there is a highly conserved pattern of two histidine-containing motifs with a varied intermotif spacing. This cupin signature is found as a central component of many microbial proteins including certain types of phosphomannose isomerase, polyketide synthase, epimerase, and dioxygenase. In addition, the signature has been identified within the N-terminal effector domain in a subgroup of bacterial AraC transcription factors. As well as these single-domain cupins, this survey has identified other classes of two-domain bicupins including bacterial gentisate 1, 2-dioxygenases and 1-hydroxy-2-naphthoate dioxygenases, fungal oxalate decarboxylases, and legume sucrose-binding proteins. Cupin evolution is discussed from the perspective of the structure-function relationships, using data from the genomes of several prokaryotes, especially Bacillus subtilis. Many of these functions involve aspects of sugar metabolism and cell wall synthesis and are concerned with responses to abiotic stress such as heat, desiccation, or starvation. Particular emphasis is also given to the oxalate-degrading enzymes from microbes, their biological significance, and their value in a range of medical and other applications.    D-mannitol is taken up by Bacillus stearothermophilus and phosphorylated via a phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent phosphotransferase system (PTS). Transcription of the genes involved in mannitol uptake in this bacterium is regulated by the transcriptional regulator MtlR, a DNA-binding protein whose affinity for DNA is controlled by phosphorylation by the PTS proteins HPr and IICB(mtl). The mutational and biochemical studies presented in this report reveal that two domains of MtlR, PTS regulation domain (PRD)-I and PRD-II, are phosphorylated by HPr, whereas a third IIA-like domain is phosphorylated by IICB(mtl). An involvement of PRD-I and the IIA-like domain in a decrease in affinity of MtlR for DNA and of PRD-II in an increase in affinity is demonstrated by DNA footprint experiments using MtlR mutants. Since both PRD-I and PRD-II are phosphorylated by HPr, PRD-I needs to be dephosphorylated by IICB(mtl) and mannitol to obtain maximal affinity for DNA. This implies that a phosphoryl group can be transferred from HPr to IICB(mtl) via MtlR. Indeed, this transfer could be demonstrated by the phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent formation of [(3)H]mannitol phosphate in the absence of IIA(mtl). Phosphoryl transfer experiments using MtlR mutants revealed that PRD-I and PRD-II are dephosphorylated via the IIA-like domain. Complementation experiments using two mutants with no or low phosphoryl transfer activity showed that phosphoryl transfer between MtlR molecules is possible, indicating that MtlR-MtlR interactions take place. Phosphorylation of the same site by HPr and dephosphorylation by IICB(mtl) have not been described before; they could also play a role in other PRD-containing proteins.    There are three members of the HtrA family of serine proteases, YkdA, YvtA, and YyxA, encoded in the chromosome of Bacillus subtilis. In this study, we report on the promoter structure and regulation of ykdA expression. The ykdA gene is heat inducible, exhibiting a biphasic pattern of expression during a 60-min interval after heat shock. Increased expression after heat shock occurs at the transcriptional level. The heat-shock-inducible promoter has a single mismatch with a SigA-type -10 motif, but does not exhibit similarity to a SigA -35 region. There are six octamer repeats with a consensus TTTTCACA positioned at, and upstream of, the normal position of a -35 region. While repeats V and VI appear dispensable, repeat IV is essential for normal thermoinducible expression. This promoter structure is also found in the control region of yvtA, encoding a second member of this family of proteases. Expression of ykdA is negatively autoregulated both during the growth cycle and during heat shock. Our evidence suggests that YkdA protease activity is not required for this form of regulation. Null mutants of ykdA display increased tolerance to heat and are 80-fold more resistant to 10 mM hydrogen peroxide than wild-type cells. However, ykdA expression is not induced by hydrogen peroxide. These results indicate that the regulon to which YkdA belongs is linked to the oxidative stress response in B. subtilis.    A 1.6-kb DraI-HindIII DNA fragment from Bacillus stearothermophilus BR388 chromosomal DNA encoding a wide-spectrum amidase was cloned into Escherichia coli DH5alpha. With acrylamide substrate, the amidase showed maximum activity at 55 degrees C, pH 7.0, and 0.12-M substrate, and demonstrated significant activity in 1-M acrylamide. A mutant prepared by PCR-based random mutagenesis of a 1.65 kb segment of B. stearothermophilus BR388 chromosomal DNA containing the amidase gene had two adenine bases replaced with guanine, resulting in a single primary structure alteration of His26 into Arg. This mutant demonstrated a 23-fold increase in amidase activity compared to wild-type, which is attributed to increased amidase gene transcription.    Single-stranded DNA-binding proteins have in common their crucial roles in DNA metabolism, although they exhibit significant differences in their single-stranded DNA binding properties. To evaluate the correlation between the structure of different nucleoprotein complexes and their function, we have carried out a comparative study of the complexes that the single-stranded DNA-binding proteins of three related bacteriophages, o29, Nf and GA-1, form with single-stranded DNA. Under the experimental conditions used, o29 and Nf single-stranded DNA-binding proteins are stable monomers in solution, while GA-1 single-stranded DNA-binding protein presents a hexameric state, as determined in glycerol gradients. The thermodynamic parameters derived from quenching measurements of the intrinsic protein fluorescence upon single-stranded DNA binding revealed (i) that GA-1 single-stranded DNA-binding protein occludes a larger binding site (n=51 nt/oligomer) than o29 and Nf SSBs (n=3.4 and 4.7 nt/monomer, respectively); and (ii) that it shows a higher global affinity for single-stranded DNA (GA-1 SSB, K(eff)=18.6 x 10(5) M(-1); o29 SSB, K(eff)=2.2 x 10(5) M(-1); Nf SSB, K(eff)=2.9 x 10(5) M(-1)). Altogether, these parameters justify the differences displayed by the GA-1 single-stranded DNA-binding protein and single-stranded DNA complex under the electron microscope, and the requirement of higher amounts of o29 and Nf single-stranded DNA-binding proteins than of GA-1 SSB in gel mobility shift assays to produce a similar effect. The structural differences of the nucleoprotein complexes formed by the three single-stranded DNA-binding proteins with single-stranded DNA correlate with their different functional stimulatory effects in o29 DNA amplification. Copyright 2000 Academic Press.    Our knowledge of protein interactions with RNA molecules has been, so far, largely restricted to cases in which the RNA itself is folded into a secondary and/or tertiary structure stabilised by intramolecular base pairing and stacking. Until recently, only limited structural information has been available about protein interactions with single-stranded RNA. A breakthrough in our understanding of these interactions came in 1999, with the determination of four crystal structures of protein complexes with extended single-stranded RNA molecules. These structures revealed wonderfully satisfying patterns of the ability of proteins to accommodate RNA bases, with the sugar-phosphate backbone often adopting conformations that are different from the classical double helix.    Using fusions of green fluorescent protein to subunits of RNA polymerase (RNAP) and ribosomes, we have investigated the subcellular localization of the transcriptional and translational machinery in the bacterium Bacillus subtilis. Unexpectedly, we found that RNAP resides principally within the nucleoid. Conversely, ribosomes localized almost exclusively outside the nucleoid, concentrating particularly towards sites of cell division. This zonal localization was not dependent on cell division and is probably due, at least in part, to exclusion from the nucleoid. Dual labelling of RNAP and ribosomes was used to confirm the spatial separation of the two processes. We conclude that, even in the absence of a nuclear membrane, transcription and translation occur predominantly in separate functional domains. At higher growth rates, concentrations of RNAP developed, probably representing the sites of rRNA synthesis. These may represent a further spatial specialization, possibly equivalent to the eukaryotic nucleolus.    Trypsin-like enzymes are major insect gut enzymes that digest dietary proteins and proteolytically activate insecticidal proteins produced by the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt). Resistance to Bt in a strain of the Indianmeal moth, Plodia interpunctella, was linked to the absence of a major trypsin-like proteinase (Oppert et al., 1997). In this study, trypsin-like proteinases, cDNA sequences, mRNA expression levels and genomic DNAs from Bt-susceptible and -resistant strains of the Indianmeal moth were compared. Proteinase activity blots of gut extracts indicated that the susceptible strain had two major trypsin-like proteinases, whereas the resistant strain had only one. Several trypsinogen-like cDNA clones were isolated and sequenced from cDNA libraries of both strains using a probe deduced from a conserved sequence for a serine proteinase active site. cDNAs of 852 nucleotides from the susceptible strain and 848 nucleotides from the resistant strain contained an open reading frame of 783 nucleotides which encoded a 261-amino acid trypsinogen-like protein. There was a single silent nucleotide difference between the two cDNAs in the open reading frame and the predicted amino acid sequence from the cDNA clones was most similar to sequences of trypsin-like proteinases from the spruce budworm, Choristoneura fumiferana, and the tobacco hornworm, Manduca sexta. The encoded protein included amino acid sequence motifs of serine proteinase active sites, conserved cysteine residues, and both zymogen activation and signal peptides. Northern blotting analysis showed no major difference between the two strains in mRNA expression in fourth-instar larvae, indicating that transcription was similar in the strains. Southern blotting analysis revealed that the restriction sites for the trypsinogen genes from the susceptible and resistant strains were different. Based on an enzyme size comparison, the cDNA isolated in this study corresponded to the gene for the smaller of two trypsin-like proteinases, which is found in both the Bt-susceptible and -resistant strains of the Indianmeal moth. The sequences reported in this paper have been deposited in the GenBank database (accession numbers AF064525 for the RC688 strain and AF064526 for HD198).    BACKGROUND: During sporulation in Bacillus subtilis, an asymmetric division produces two cells, a forespore and mother cell, with which follow different developmental paths. The highly ordered programme of temporal and spatial gene activation during sporulation is governed by the principal RNA polymerase holoenzyme (EsigmaA) and alternative holoenzyme forms containing the developmental sigma factors sigmaH, sigmaF, sigmaE, sigmaG and sigmaK, which appear successively during development. The control mechanism(s) of temporal and selective association of multiple sigma factors with core RNA polymerase is unclear. As a first step to addressing these issues, this report quantifies the amount of each subunit of RNA polymerase that is present in the sporangium during sporulation, and analyses in vitro the relative affinities of each sigma subunit for core RNA polymerase. RESULTS: Using quantitative immunoblot analysis, the amounts of EsigmaA, EsigmaH, EsigmaE and EsigmaK in relation to the total amount of RNA polymerase at appropriate time-points were found to be 15%, 1%, 6% and 2%, respectively. Therefore, the core RNA polymerase is predicted to be in excess. The level of core RNA polymerase and sigmaA remained constant during the transition from vegetative growth to sporulation, whereas the sporulation-specific sigma factors appeared successively, in the order sigmaH, sigmaE and sigmaK. Competition experiments between sigma factors in an in vitro transcription system revealed the dominance of sigmaA over sigmaH and sigmaE for open promoter complex formation. These results are inconsistent with the idea that late appearing sigma factors can displace earlier appearing sigmas from the core enzyme. CONCLUSIONS: As the core RNA polymerase is in excess, the results suggest that successive sigma factors can bind to core RNA polymerase without having to displace earlier appearing sigma factors. Thus, the programme of gene expression during sporulation might not require mechanisms for the substitution of one sigma factor by another on the core RNA polymerase.    Stress-induced activation of the Bacillus subtilis transcription factor sigma(B) is transitory. To determine whether the process that limits sigma(B) activation is itself triggered by stress, B. subtilis strains in which the stress pathway was artificially activated by the induced expression of a positive regulatory protein (RsbT) were exposed to ethanol stress and were monitored for the persistence of sigma(B) activity. Without ethanol treatment, the induced cultures displayed continuously high sigma(B) activity. Ethanol treatment restricted ongoing sigma(B) activity, but only in strains with intact rsbX and -S genes. The loss of other gene products (RsbR and Obg) known to participate in the stress activation pathway had little influence in blocking the ethanol effect. The data argue that stress upregulates the activity of the RsbX-S regulatory pair to restrict sigma(B) induction following stress.    Candidate partitioning genes (parA and parB) for the linear chromosome of Streptomyces coelicolor were identified by DNA sequencing in a series of seven genes located between rnpA and trxA near the chromosomal replication origin. The most likely translation start point of parB overlapped the parA stop codon, suggestive of coregulation, and transcription analysis suggested that the two genes formed an operon. Deletion of part of parB had no effect on the growth or appearance of colonies but caused a deficiency in DNA partitioning during the multiple septation events involved in converting aerial hyphae into long chains of spores. At least 13% of spore compartments failed to inherit the normal DNA allocation. The same phenotype was obtained with a deletion removing a segment of DNA from both parA and parB. Reinforcing the idea of a special role for the par locus during sporulation, the stronger of two parAB promoters was greatly upregulated at about the time when sporulation septation was maximal in colonies. Three copies of a 14-bp inverted repeat (GTTTCACGTGAAAC) were found in or near the parAB genes, and at least 12 more identical copies were identified within 100 kb of oriC from the growing genome sequence database. Only one perfect copy of the 14-bp sequence was present in approximately 5 Mb of sequence available from the rest of the genome. The 14-bp sequence was similar to sequences identified as binding sites for Spo0J, a ParB homologue from Bacillus subtilis believed to be important for DNA partitioning (D. C.-H. Lin and A. D. Grossman, Cell 92:675-685, 1998). One of these sites encompassed the transcription start point of the stronger parA promoter.    The ykzB and ykoL genes encode two peptides, of 51 and 60 amino acids, the functions of which are unknown. The ykzB and tnrA genes are contiguous and transcribed divergently. Expression of ykzB and ykoL is induced by glutamate and is under the control of the TnrA global regulator of nitrogen utilization. TnrA regulated its own synthesis in glutamate minimal medium. Two DNA sequences (TnrAB1 and TnrAB2) homologous to the TnrA binding site are present in the region between tnrA and ykzB. Deletion mapping indicated that the TnrAB2 binding site was involved in activation of the ykzB promoter. In addition, transcription of tnrA depends on the presence of the TnrAB1 binding site. The ykzB and ykoL genes are probably in the same transcriptional unit. A single promoter involved in transcription in the presence of glutamate was mapped by primer extension. ykoL expression was induced by phosphate limitation and depended on the PhoP-PhoR two-component regulatory system. Its promoter was mapped to the region between ykoL and ykzB. Four boxes similar to the PhoP binding site are present upstream from the ykoL promoter. These boxes are probably recognized by PhoP approximately P during the activation of transcription in phosphate limitation conditions.    A global mechanism of catabolite repression of the genus Bacillus comprises negative regulation exerted through the binding of the CcpA protein to the catabolite-responsive elements (cres) of the target genes. We searched for cre sequences in the Bacillus subtilis genome using a query sequence, WTGNAANCGNWNNCW (N and W stand for any base and A or T, respectively), picking out 126 putative and known cre sequences. To examine their cre function, we integrated spac promoter (P spac )-cre-lacZ fusions into the amyE locus. Examination of catabolite repression of beta-galactosidase synthesis in the integrants led us to the following conclusions: (i) lower mismatching of cre sequences to the query sequence is required for their function; (ii) although cre sequences are partially palindromic, low mismatching in the same direction as that of transcription of the target genes is more critical for their function than that in the inverse direction; and (iii) yet, a more palindromic nature of cre sequences is desirable for a better function. Furthermore, the alignment of 22 cre s that function in vivo implicated a consensus sequence, WWTGNAARCGNWWWCAWW (R stands for G or A). Interestingly, in the case where cre sequences are located in the protein-coding regions of the target genes, their conserved bases are preferentially the third bases of codons where base degeneracy is allowed.    DNA-binding protein HU (BstHU) from Bacillus stearothermophilus is a homodimeric protein which binds to DNA in a sequence-nonspecific manner. In order to identify the Arg residues essential for DNA binding, four Arg residues (Arg-53, Arg-55, Arg-58, and Arg-61) within the beta-arm structure were replaced either by Gln, Lys, or Glu residues, and the resulting mutants were characterized with respect to their DNA-binding activity by a filter-binding analysis and surface plasmon resonance analysis. The results indicate that three Arg residues (Arg-55, Arg-58, and Arg-61) play a crucial role in DNA binding as positively charged recognition groups in the order of Arg-55 &gt; Arg-58 &gt; Arg-61 and that these are required to decrease the dissociation rate constant for BstHU-DNA interaction. In contrast, the Arg-53 residue was found to make no contribution to the binding activity of BstHU.    The Bacillus subtilis tryptophan biosynthetic genes are regulated by the trp RNA-binding attenuation protein (TRAP). Cooperative binding of L-tryptophan activates TRAP so that it can bind to RNA. The crystal structure revealed that L-tryptophan forms nine hydrogen bonds with various amino acid residues of TRAP. We performed site-directed mutagenesis to determine the importance of several of these hydrogen bonds in TRAP activation. We tested both alanine substitutions as well as substitutions more closely related to the natural amino acid at appropriate positions. Tryptophan binding mutations were identified in vivo having unchanged, reduced, or completely eliminated repression activity. Several of the in vivo defective TRAP mutants exhibited reduced affinity for tryptophan in vitro but did not interfere with RNA binding at saturating tryptophan concentrations. However, a 10-fold decrease in TRAP affinity for tryptophan led to an almost complete loss of regulation, whereas increased TRAP affinity for tryptophan had little or no effect on the in vivo regulatory activity of TRAP. One hydrogen bond was found to be dispensable for TRAP activity, whereas two others appear to be essential for TRAP function. Another mutant protein exhibited tryptophan-independent RNA binding activity. We also found that trp leader RNA increases the affinity of TRAP for tryptophan.    In Bacillus subtilis, tryptophan biosynthesis is regulated by a mechanism called attenuation. The new crystal structure of the &apos;trp RNA binding attenuation protein&apos;, TRAP, in complex with RNA has provided new structural insights into how proteins can bind RNA to regulate transcription and translation.    Synergistic carbon catabolite repression of the Bacillus subtilis aconitase (citB) gene by glucose and a source of 2-ketoglutarate is dependent on DNA sequences located upstream of the gene. Mutations in a dyad symmetry element centered at position -66 and in a repeat of the downstream arm of the dyad symmetry at position -27 cause derepressed citB expression. In this work, a protein able to bind to a DNA fragment containing these elements was purified and identified. This protein, named CcpC (Catabolite control protein C), shares sequence similarity with members of the LysR family of transcriptional regulators. In addition to binding to the citB promoter, CcpC bound to the promoter of the citZ gene, which encodes the cell&apos;s major citrate synthase and is subject to carbon catabolite repression. In a ccpC null mutant, expression of both citB and citZ was derepressed in glucose-glutamine minimal medium, indicating that CcpC is a negative regulator of citB and citZ gene expression. DNase I footprinting experiments showed that CcpC binds to two sites within the citB promoter region, corresponding to the dyad symmetry and -27 elements. In the presence of citrate, a putative inducer, only the dyad symmetry element was fully protected by CcpC. When the dyad symmetry element was mutated, CcpC was no longer able to bind to either the dyad symmetry or -27 elements. Repression of citB and citZ gene expression during anaerobiosis also proved to be mediated by CcpC. Copyright 2000 Academic Press.    The radC gene, whose product plays a role in the prokaryotic repair of DNA damage after UV and X-ray irradiation, was cloned and sequenced from the phototrophic bacterium Rhodobacter capsulatus B10. The gene codes for a protein of 214 amino acids with a molecular mass of 23,792 Da. The deduced amino acid sequence showed significant homology with the RadC proteins of Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis and Haemophilus influenzae. Northern blot analysis indicated that under both chemotrophic and phototrophic growth conditions the radC gene was relatively highly expressed and was induced about five-fold after UV-irradiation. Primer extension analysis revealed that transcription was initiated from the same position before and after UV treatment. Mutants (radC negative) have a low survival rate and a slower growth rate than the wild type.    A118 is a temperate phage isolated from Listeria monocytogenes. In this study, we report the entire nucleotide sequence and structural analysis of its 40 834 bp DNA. Electron microscopic and enzymatic analyses revealed that the A118 genome is a linear, circularly permuted, terminally redundant collection of double-stranded DNA molecules. No evidence for cohesive ends or for a terminase recognition (pac) site could be obtained, suggesting that A118 viral DNA is packaged via a headful mechanism. Partial denaturation mapping of DNA cross-linked to the tail shaft indicated that DNA packaging proceeds from left to right with respect to the arbitrary genomic map and the direction of genes necessary for lytic development. Seventy-two open reading frames (ORFs) were identified on the A118 genome, which are apparently organized in a life cycle-specific manner into at least three major transcriptional units. N-terminal amino acid sequencing, bioinformatic analyses and functional characterizations enabled the assignment of possible functions to 26 ORFs, which included DNA packaging proteins, morphopoetic proteins, lysis components, lysogeny control-associated functions and proteins necessary for DNA recombination, modification and replication. Comparative analysis of the A118 genome structure with other bacteriophages revealed local, but sometimes extensive, similarities to a number of phages spanning a broader phylogenetic range of various low G+C host bacteria, which implies relatively recent exchange of genes or genetic modules. We have also identified the A118 attachment site attP and the corresponding attB in Listeria monocytogenes, and show that site-specific integration of the A118 prophage by the A118 integrase occurs into a host gene homologous to comK of Bacillus subtilis, an autoregulatory gene specifying the major competence transcription factor.    The aprE gene of Bacillus subtilis encodes the major serine alkaline protease known as subtilisin. It is expressed during the transition state and transcribed by the sigma(A) form of the RNA polymerase (RNAP). In this work, we characterized the regulatory region of the aprE gene (rraprE) from B. subtilis. By computer analysis and site-directed mutagenesis, we localized the aprE promoter sequence 7 bp upstream from its transcription initiation site (TIS). We also characterized the static curvature properties of the rraprE DNA and found two different areas of DNA bending, within the first 400 bp upstream of its TIS. We postulate that these particular curved DNA regions could play a role in the interaction with some regulatory proteins and discuss possible implications related to aprE transcription regulation.    ShaA (sodium/hydrogen antiporter, previously termed YufT [or NtrA]), which is responsible for Na(+)/H(+) antiporter activity, is considered to be the major Na(+) excretion system in Bacillus subtilis. We found that a shaA-disrupted mutant of B. subtilis shows impaired sporulation but normal vegetative growth when the external Na(+) concentration was increased in a low range. In the shaA mutant, sigma(H)-dependent expression of spo0A (P(S)) and spoVG at an early stage of sporulation was sensitive to external NaCl. The level of sigma(H) protein was reduced by the addition of NaCl, while the expression of spo0H, which encodes sigma(H), was little affected, indicating that posttranscriptional control of sigma(H) rather than spo0H transcription is affected by the addition of NaCl in the shaA mutant. Since this mutant is considered to have a diminished ability to maintain a low internal Na(+) concentration, an increased level of internal Na(+) may affect posttranscriptional control of sigma(H). Bypassing the phosphorelay by introducing the sof-1 mutation into this mutant did not restore spo0A (P(S)) expression, suggesting that disruption of shaA affects sigma(H) accumulation, but does not interfere with the phosphorylation and phosphotransfer reactions of the phosphorelay. These results suggest that ShaA plays a significant role at an early stage of sporulation and not only during vegetative growth. Our findings raise the possibility that fine control of cytoplasmic ion levels, including control of the internal Na(+) concentration, may be important for the progression of the sporulation process.    Transcription initiation of the copy-number control and better-than-random segregation genes of the broad-host-range and low-copy-number plasmid pSM19035 are subjected to repression by the autoregulated pSM19035-encoded omega product in Bacillus subtilis cells. The promoters of the copS (Pcop1 and Pcop2), delta (Pdelta), and omega (Pomega) genes have been mapped. These promoters are embedded in a set of either seven copies of a 7-bp direct repeat or in a block consisting of two 7-bp direct repeats and one 7-bp inverted repeat; the blocks are present either two or three times. The cooperative binding of omega protein to the repeats on the Pcop1, Pcop2, Pdelta, and Pomega promoters represses transcription initiation by a mechanism that does not exclude sigma(A)RNAP from the promoters. These results indicate that omega protein regulates plasmid maintenance by controlling the copy number on the one hand and by regulating the amount of proteins required for better-than-random segregation on the other hand.    The expression of the cyclodextrin glucanotransferase (CGTase) gene (cgt) of Bacillus ohbensis, when introduced into an alpha-amylase-defective strain of B. subtilis on a multicopy plasmid, pHY300PLK, was induced in the presence of starch and was subject to catabolite repression by glucose as well as in the original strain, B. ohbensis. We constructed a cgt&apos;::&apos;lacZ translational fusion to study the expression in B. subtilis, and this construct was confirmed to be subject to both starch induction and catabolite repression. In order to define the region involved in the regulation of the cgt gene, a series of cgt&apos;::&apos;lacZ gene with various lengths of deletion in the promoter region was constructed on pHY300PLK. DNA regions responsible for starch induction and catabolite repression by glucose could be separated in the deletion experiment. Primer extension analysis showed that the catabolite repression was controlled at the initiation of transcription, while the starch induction is likely to be controlled by a transcriptional termination-antitermination mechanism.    During sporulation, Bacillus thuringiensis produces intracellular, crystalline inclusions comprised of a mixture of protoxins active on insect larvae. A major class of these protoxin genes, designated cry1, is transcribed from two overlapping promoters (BtI and BtII) utilizing RNA polymerase containing sporulation sigma factors sigma(E) and sigma(K), respectively. Fusions of these promoters to lacZ were constructed in order to analyze transcription patterns. Mutations within the -10 region of the BtII promoter (within the spacer region of the BtI promoter) which departed from the consensus -10 sequence for either sigma(E) or sigma(K) resulted in inactivation of transcription from BtII and a fivefold stimulation of transcription from BtI. In contrast, transcription from both promoters was inhibited with a change to the sigma(E) consensus. One of the &quot;promoter-up&quot; mutations was fused to the cry1Ac1 gene, and enhanced transcription was confirmed by Northern blotting. There was an increase in the accumulation of Cry1Ac antigen at early but not later times in sporulation in the mutant. This shift was due to the rapid turnover of much of the excessively accumulated protoxin at the early times as measured by pulse-chase labeling. As a result of the turnover and the inactivation of the BtII promoter, the mutant produced smaller inclusions which contained two- to threefold-less protoxin than inclusions from the wild type. Promoter overlap is a mechanism for modulating protoxin synthesis, thus ensuring the efficient packaging of these protoxins into inclusions.    Expression of the Bacillus subtilis glpD gene, which encodes glycerol-3-phosphate (G3P) dehydrogenase, is controlled by termination or antitermination of transcription. The untranslated leader sequence of glpD contains an inverted repeat that gives rise to a transcription terminator. In the presence of G3P, the antiterminator protein GlpP binds to glpD leader mRNA and promotes readthrough of the terminator. Certain mutations in the inverted repeat of the glpD leader result in GlpP-independent, temperature-sensitive (TS) expression of glpD. The TS phenotype is due to temperature-dependent degradation of the glpD mRNA. In the presence of GlpP, the glpD mRNA is stabilized. glpD leader-lacZ fusions were integrated into the chromosomes of B. subtilis and Escherichia coli. Determination of steady-state levels of fusion mRNA in B. subtilis showed that the stability of the fusion mRNA is determined by the glpD leader part. Comparison of steady-state levels and half-lives of glpD leader-lacZ fusion mRNA in B. subtilis and E. coli revealed significant differences. A glpD leader-lacZ fusion transcript that was unstable in B. subtilis was considerably more stable in E. coli. GlpP, which stabilizes the transcript in B. subtilis, did not affect its stability in E. coli. Primer extension analysis showed that the glpD leader-lacZ fusion transcript is processed differently in B. subtilis and in E. coli. The dominating cleavage site in E. coli was barely detectable in B. subtilis. This site was shown to be a target of E. coli RNase III.    The sigmaB transcription factor of the bacterium Bacillus subtilis is activated by growth-limiting energy or environmental challenge to direct the synthesis of more than 100 general stress proteins. Although the signal transduction pathway that conveys these stress signals to sigmaB is becoming increasingly well understood, how environmental or energy stress signals enter this pathway remains unknown. We show here that two PP2C serine phosphatases - RsbP, which is required for response to energy stress, and RsbU, which is required for response to environmental stress - each converge on the RsbV regulator of sigmaB. According to the current understanding of sigmaB regulation, in unstressed cells the phosphorylated RsbV anti-anti-sigma is unable to complex the RsbW anti-sigma, which is then free to bind and inactivate sigmaB. We can now advance the model that either PP2C phosphatase, when triggered by its particular class of stress, can remove the phosphate from RsbV and thereby activate sigmaB. The action of the previously described RsbU is known to be controlled by dedicated upstream signalling components that are activated by environmental stress. The action of the RsbP phosphatase described here requires an energy stress, which we suggest is sensed, at least in part, by the PAS domain in the amino-terminal region of the RsbP phosphatase. In other bacterial signalling proteins, similar PAS domains and their associated chromophores directly sense changes in intracellular redox potential to control the activity of a linked output domain.    Streptomyces coelicolor produces at least three catalases, the expression of which varies under different conditions. We characterized a gene (catB) for developmentally controlled catalase of 779 amino acids (83408 Da), homologous to KatE of Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis. Expression of the catB gene increased at the stationary phase in liquid culture and after the onset of differentiation on solid culture. It was also increased by osmotic treatments. Transcription was initiated from a promoter (catBp), whose sequence (ATGCCTCG-N13-GGGTAC) resembled promoters recognized by sigmaB of B. subtilis. CatB protein underwent proteolytic cleavage of its N-terminal 95 amino acids and was secreted to the medium when cells sporulated. Disruption of the catB gene caused impairment in the formation of aerial mycelium and reduction in the synthesis of undecylprodigiosin. On the contrary, hyperproduction of actinorhodin was observed in accordance with the increase in actII-ORF4 transcription. In addition, catB mutant became hypersensitive to osmotic stresses. These results suggest that regulated synthesis of CatB protein is necessary to ensure proper differentiation as well as to protect S. coelicolor cells against osmotic stresses.    UV resistance of bacterial endospores derives from a unique DNA photochemistry in which the major UV photoproduct is the thymine dimer 5-thyminyl-5,6-dihydrothymine (spore photoproduct [SP]) instead of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers. Repair of SP during spore germination is due in large part to the activity of the enzyme SP lyase encoded by splB, the second cistron of the splAB operon. Expression of the splAB operon in Bacillus subtilis is transcriptionally activated by the Esigma(G) form of RNA polymerase during morphological stage III in the developing forespore compartment, and SP lyase is packaged into the dormant spore. In addition to temporal and compartmental control of splAB expression, a second regulatory circuit which modulates the level of expression of splB-lacZ fusions without altering their developmental timing or compartmentalization is reported here. This second regulatory circuit involves the negative action of the splA gene product, a 79-amino-acid protein with approximately 50% similarity and 17% identity to TRAP, the tryptophan RNA-binding attenuation protein from B. subtilis and Bacillus pumilus.    Differential gene expression during Bacillus subtilis sporulation is controlled by sigma factors and other regulatory effectors. The first compartmentalized sigma factor, sigma(F), is active specifically in the prespore compartment. During our screening for new chromosome segregation mutants using a sigma(F)-dependent gpr-lacZ reporter as a probe, we identified a new gene (ywfN) required for maximal expression of the reporter and named it rsfA. The product of rsfA has features of gene regulatory proteins, and the protein colocalizes with DNA. The expression of rsfA is under the control of both sigma(F) and sigma(G). Null mutations in rsfA have different effects on the expression of sigma(F)-dependent genes, suggesting that the RsfA protein is a regulator of transcription that fine-tunes gene expression in the prespore.    In the phosphorelay signal transduction system for sporulation initiation in Bacillus subtilis, the opposing activities of histidine kinases and aspartyl phosphate phosphatases determine the cell&apos;s decision whether to continue with vegetative growth or to initiate the differentiation process. Regulated dephosphorylation of the Spo0A and Spo0F response regulators allows a variety of negative signals from physiological processes that are antithetical to sporulation to impact on the activation level of the phosphorelay. Spo0F approximately P is the known target of two related phosphatases, RapA and RapB. In addition to RapA and RapB, a third member of the Rap family of phosphatases, RapE, specifically dephosphorylated the Spo0F approximately P intermediate in response to competence development. RapE phosphatase activity was found to be controlled by a pentapeptide (SRNVT) generated from within the carboxy-terminal domain of the phrE gene product. A synthetic PhrE pentapeptide could (i) complement the sporulation deficiency caused by deregulated RapE activity of a phrE mutant and (ii) inhibit RapE-dependent dephosphorylation of Spo0F approximately P in in vitro experiments. The PhrE pentapeptide did not inhibit the phosphatase activity of RapA and RapB. These results confirm previous conclusions that the specificity for recognition of the target phosphatase is contained within the amino acid sequence of the pentapeptide inhibitor.    Activation of the final sporulation-specific transcription factor, sigma(K), is regulated by a signal emanating from the forespore which interacts with the pro-sigma(K) processing complex, comprising SpoIVFA, BofA, and the pro-sigma(K) processing protease, SpoIVFB. Mature sigma(K) then directs late gene expression in the parental compartment of the developing sporangial cell. The nature of this complex and how it is activated to process pro-sigma(K) are not understood. All three proteins are predicted to be integral membrane proteins. Here, we have analyzed the membrane topology of SpoIVFA and SpoIVFB by constructing chimeric forms of spoIVFA and spoIVFB with the complementary reporters phoA and lacZ and analyzing activity in Escherichia coli. SpoIVFA was found to have a single transmembrane-spanning domain, while SpoIVFB was shown to have six transmembrane-spanning domains (6-transmembrane configuration). Further, SpoIVFA is required to stabilize SpoIVFB in the membrane. SpoIVFB was shown to have a 4-transmembrane configuration when expressed on its own but was found to have a 6-transmembrane configuration when coexpressed with SpoIVFA, while BofA had a positive effect on the assembly of both SpoIVFA and SpoIVFB. The single transmembrane domain of SpoIVFA (approximately residues 73 to 90) was shown to be the principle determinant in stabilizing the 6-transmembrane configuration of SpoIVFB. Although the bofB8 allele, which uncouples the sigma(K) checkpoint, did not appear to promote a conformational change from a 6- to 4-transmembrane configuration of SpoIVFB (apparently ruling out a profound conformational change as the mechanism of activating SpoIVFB proteolytic activity), instability of SpoIVFB may be an important factor in SpoIVFB-mediated processing of pro-sigma(K).    Bacillus subtilis can utilize several sugars as single sources of carbon and energy. Many of these sugars are transported and concomitantly phosphorylated by the phosphoenolpyruvate:sugar phosphotransferase system (PTS). In addition to its role in sugar uptake, the PTS is one of the major signal transduction systems in B. subtilis. In this study, an analysis of the complete set of PTS proteins encoded within the B. subtilis genome is presented. Fifteen sugar-specific PTS permeases were found to be present and the functions of novel PTS permeases were studied based on homology to previously characterized permeases, analysis of the structure of the gene clusters in which the permease encoding genes are located and biochemical analysis of relevant mutants. Members of the glucose, sucrose, lactose, mannose and fructose/mannitol families of PTS permeases were identified. Interestingly, nine pairs of IIB and IIC domains belonging to the glucose and sucrose permease families are present in B. subtilis; by contrast only five Enzyme IIA(Glc)-like proteins or domains are encoded within the B. subtilis genome. Consequently, some of the EIIA(Glc)-like proteins must function in phosphoryl transfer to more than one IIB domain of the glucose and sucrose families. In addition, 13 PTS-associated proteins are encoded within the B. subtilis genome. These proteins include metabolic enzymes, a bifunctional protein kinase/phosphatase, a transcriptional cofactor and transcriptional regulators that are involved in PTS-dependent signal transduction. The PTS proteins and the auxiliary PTS proteins represent a highly integrated network that catalyses and simultaneously modulates carbohydrate utilization in this bacterium.    The cell walls of Gram-positive bacteria consist primarily of a macromolecular matrix comprising similar amounts of peptidoglycan and covalently attached anionic polymers. Under most growth conditions the anionic polymers of Bacillus subtilis are principally teichoic acids; in strain 168 these include a polyglycerol teichoic acid and a glucose/galactosamine-containing teichoic acid. However, when cultures are subjected to phosphate stress the bacterium induces a complex series of responses, one of which is the replacement of at least part of the wall teichoic acid with teichuronic acid, a non-phosphate-containing anionic polymer. In this paper the construction of a transcriptional reporter strain that facilitates the monitoring of the promoter region upstream of the tua operon involved in teichuronic acid synthesis and its controlled expression are reported. The expression of the tua operon was monitored in both phosphate-starved, non-growing batch cultures and phosphate-limited continuous cultures. We show that the transcription of the operon correlates well with the anionic polymer composition of the cell walls.    Pathogenic species of Mycobacterium are slowly growing intracellular bacteria. Slow growth is important for the parasitism of these organisms and chronicity of the disease, but its precise mechanism has not been elucidated. Recently, we found that a novel DNA-binding protein (MDPI) was expressed (7-10% in total protein) in mycobacteria, such as Mycobacterium bovis bacillus Calmette-Guerin, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and Mycobacterium leprae. In this study, we observed that MDPI interfered with replication, transcription, and translation in the analysis in in vitro E. coli cell-free macromolecular biosynthesizing systems. Furthermore, MDPI inhibited the rapid growth of both Escherichia coli and Mycobacterium smegmatis, and NH(2)-terminal second amino acid, asparagine, was observed to be important in terms of this function. These data suggest an important role of MDPI for suppression of growth rates of mycobacteria.    The Spo0J and Soj proteins of B. subtilis belong to a widespread family of bacterial proteins required for accurate segregation of plasmids and chromosomes. Spo0J binds to several sites around the oriC region of the chromosome, which are organized into compact foci that may play a centromere-like role in active chromosome segregation. We now show that Soj has a role in organization or compaction of Spo0J-oriC complexes and possibly other regions of the nucleoid. This activity is accompanied by a dynamic localization pattern in which Soj protein undergoes assembly and disassembly into large nucleoid-associated patches on a timescale of minutes. The dynamic behavior of Soj, like its previously described transcriptional repression activity, is controlled by Spo0J. These interactions may constitute a checkpoint coupling developmental transcription to cell cycle progression.    In B. subtilis, the chromosome partitioning proteins Soj (ParA) and Spo0J (ParB) regulate the initiation of sporulation. Soj is a negative regulator of sporulation gene expression, and Spo0J antagonizes Soj function. Using fusions of Soj to green fluorescent protein, we found that Soj localized near the cell poles and upon entry into stationary phase oscillated from pole to pole. In the absence of Spo0J, Soj was associated predominantly with DNA. By in vivo cross-linking and immunoprecipitation, we found that Soj physically associates with developmentally regulated promoters, and this association increased in the absence of Spo0J. These results show that Soj switches localization and function depending on the chromosome partitioning protein Spo0J. We further show that mutations in the Soj ATPase domain disrupt localization and function and render Soj insensitive to regulation by Spo0J.    Genes encoding L-sorbose metabolism of Lactobacillus casei ATCC 393 have been identified on a 6.8-kb chromosomal DNA fragment. Sequence analysis revealed seven complete genes and a partial open reading frame transcribed as two units. The deduced amino acid sequences of the first transcriptional unit (sorRE) showed high similarity to the transcriptional regulator and the L-sorbose-1-phosphate reductase of the sorbose (sor) operon from Klebsiella pneumoniae. The other genes are transcribed as one unit (sorFABCDG) in opposite direction to sorRE. The deduced peptide sequence of sorF showed homology with the D-sorbitol-6-phosphate dehydrogenase encoded in the sor operon from K. pneumoniae and sorABCD to components of the mannose phosphotransferase system (PTS) family but especially to domains EIIA, EIIB, EIIC and EIID of the phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent L-sorbose PTS from K. pneumoniae. Finally, the deduced amino acid sequence of a truncated gene (sorG) located downstream of sorD presented high similarity with ketose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolases. Results of studies on enzyme activities and transcriptional analysis revealed that the two gene clusters, sorRE and sorFABCDG, are induced by L-sorbose and subject to catabolite repression by D-glucose. Data indicating that the catabolite repression is mediated by components of the PTS elements and by CcpA, are presented. Results of sugar uptake assays in L. casei wild-type and sorBC mutant strains indicated that L-sorbose is taken up by L-sorbose-specific enzyme II and that L. casei contains an inducible D-fructose-specific PTS. Results of growth analysis of those strains and a man sorBC double mutant suggested that L-sorbose is probably also transported by the D-mannose PTS. We also present evidence, from studies on a sorR mutant, suggesting that the sorR gene encodes a positive regulator of the two sor operons. Sequence alignment of SorR, SorC (K. pneumoniae), and DeoR (Bacillus subtilis) revealed that they might constitute a new group of transcriptional regulators.    We present evidence that the sporulation protein SpoIVFB of Bacillus subtilis is a member of a newly recognized family of metalloproteases that have catalytic centers adjacent to or within the membrane. SpoIVFB is required for converting the membrane-associated precursor protein, pro-sigma(K), to the mature and active transcription factor sigma(K) by proteolytic removal of an N-terminal extension of 20 amino acids. SpoIVFB and other family members share the conserved sequence HEXXH, a hallmark of metalloproteases, as well as a second conserved motif NPDG, which is unique to the family. Both motifs, which are expected to form the catalytic center of the protease, overlap hydrophobic segments that are predicted to be separate transmembrane domains. The only other characterized member of this family of membrane-embedded metalloproteases is the mammalian Site-2 protease (S2P), which is required for the intramembrane cleavage of the eukaryotic transcription factor sterol regulatory element binding protein (SREBP). We report that amino acid substitutions in the two conserved motifs of SpoIVFB impair pro-sigma(K) processing and sigma(K)-directed gene expression during sporulation. These results and those from a similar analysis of S2P support the interpretation that both proteins are founding members of a family of metalloproteases involved in the activation of membrane-associated transcription factors. Thus, the pathways that govern the activation of the prokaryotic transcription factor pro-sigma(K) and the mammalian transcription factor SREBP not only are analogous but also use processing enzymes with strikingly homologous features.    Many biological processes are mediated through the action of multiprotein complexes, often assembled at specific cellular locations. Bacterial endospores for example, are encased in a proteinaceous coat, which confers resistance to lysozyme and harsh chemicals and influences the spore response to germinants. In Bacillus subtilis, the coat is composed of more than 20 polypeptides, organized into three main layers: an amorphous undercoat; a lamellar, lightly staining inner structure; and closely apposed to it, a striated electron-dense outer coat. Synthesis of the coat proteins is temporally and spatially governed by a cascade of four mother cell-specific transcription factors. However, the order of assembly and final destination of the coat structural components may rely mainly on specific protein-protein interactions, as well as on the action of accessory morphogenetic proteins. Proteolytic events, protein-protein crosslinking, and protein glycosylation also play a role in the assembly process. These modifications are carried out by enzymes that may themselves be targeted to the coat layers. Coat genes have been identified by reverse genetics or, more recently, by screens for mother cell-specific promoters or for peptide sequences able to interact with certain bait proteins. A role for a given locus in coat assembly is established by a combination of regulatory, functional, morphological, and topological criteria. Because of the amenability of B. subtilis to genetic analysis (now facilitated by the knowledge of its genome sequence), coat formation has become an attractive model for the assembly of complex macromolecular structures during development. Copyright 2000 Academic Press.    Transcriptional antiterminators of the BglG/SacY family are regulatory proteins that mediate the induction of sugar metabolizing operons in Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Upon activation, these proteins bind to specific targets in nascent mRNAs, thereby preventing abortive dissociation of the RNA polymerase from the DNA template. We have previously characterized the RNA-binding domain of SacY from Bacillus subtilis and determined its three-dimensional structure by both NMR and crystallography. In the present study, we have characterized the paralogous domain from LicT and we present the first structural comparison between two BglG/SacY family members. Similar to SacY, the RNA-binding activity of LicT is contained within the 56 N-terminal amino acid residue fragment corresponding to the so-called co-antiterminator (CAT) domain. Surface plasmon resonance affinity measurements show that, compared to SacY-CAT, LicT-CAT binds more tightly and more specifically to its cognate RNA target, with a KD value of about 10(-8) M. The crystal structure of LicT-CAT has been determined at 1.8 A resolution and compared to that of SacY-CAT. Both molecules fold as symmetrical dimers, each monomer comprising a four-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet that stacks against the beta-sheet of the other monomer in a very conserved manner. Comparison of the proposed RNA-binding surfaces shows that many of the conserved atoms concentrate in a central region across one face of the CAT dimer, whereas variable elements are mostly found at the edges. Interestingly, the electrostatic potential maps calculated for the two molecules are quite different, except for the core of the RNA-binding site, which appears essentially neutral in both structures. Copyright 1999 Academic Press.    The pyrH gene of Lactococcus lactis subsp. cremoris MG1363, encoding UMP kinase, has been sequenced and cloned. It encodes a polypeptide of 239 amino acid residues (deduced molecular weight of 25951), which was shown to complement a temperature sensitive pyrH mutation in Escherichia coli, thus establishing the ability of the encoded protein to synthesize UDP. The pyrH gene in L. lactis is flanked downstream by frr1 encoding ribosomal recycling factor 1 and upstream by an open reading frame, orfA, of unknown function. The three genes were shown to constitute an operon transcribed in the direction orfA-pyrH-frr1 from a promoter immediately in front of orfA. This operon belongs to an evolutionary highly conserved gene cluster, since the organization of pyrH on the chromosomal level in L. lactis shows a high resemblance to that found in Bacillus subtilis as well as in Escherichia coli and several other prokaryotes    Genetic competence in both Bacillus subtilis and Streptococcus pneumoniae, as well as virulence in Staphylococcus aureus, are regulated by quorum-sensing mechanisms that use two-component signal transduction systems to respond to extracellular peptide pheromones. Recent data indicate that in all three systems closely related strains express markedly different pheromones and polytopic membrane receptor proteins. This polymorphism may function as a sexual isolation mechanism. In B. subtilis the downstream segment of the competence regulatory pathway acts by controlling the stability of a key transcription factor. In S. pneumoniae the downstream segment involves the transcriptional activation of a minor sigma factor that is in turn responsible for the expression of late competence genes.    The nucleotide sequence of a 2837-base pairs (bp) EcoRI-PvuI fragment of Bacillus stearothermophilus LV chromosomal DNA encoding the bstLVIM gene was determined. It revealed a large open reading frame (ORF) of 1737 bp specifying a methylase of 579 amino acid (aa) residues and Mr 66,831. This was in agreement with the size estimated for the M. BstLVI ( approximately 67 kDa) purified from Escherichia coli cells harboring a recombinant plasmid containing the bstLVIM gene and with results of transcription-translation experiments performed in vitro. Upstream the bstLVIM gene and in the opposite transcriptional orientation, there is a 81-aa ORF that showed great homology with the regulatory C proteins identified in other type II restriction and modification (R-M) systems. This 81-aa ORF precedes a truncated ORF of 86 aa which in turn may represent the structural gene for the BstLVI restriction endonuclease.    Haemolysin BL (HBL) is a Bacillus cereus toxin composed of a binding component, B, and two lytic components, L1 and L2. HBL is also the enterotoxin responsible for the diarrhoeal food poisoning syndrome caused by several strains of B. cereus. The three genes encoding the HBL components constitute an operon and are transcribed from a promoter 608 bp upstream of the hblC translational start site. The first gene of the hbl operon, hblC, in the B. cereus type strain, ATCC 14579, was inactivated in this study. Inactivation of hblC strongly reduced both the enterotoxigenic activity of B. cereus ATCC 14579 and the haemolytic activity against sheep erythrocytes, while maintaining full haemolytic activity against human erythrocytes.    aprX is a 1326 bp gene of Bacillus subtilis strain 168 that encodes a serine protease, probably intracellular, characterized by significant similarity with subtilisins, thermitases and pyrolysins. Transcription analysis, performed by RT-PCR and primer extension, allowed the localization of the active promoter and showed that aprX is expressed in stationary phase. The pattern of expression of aprX and its dependence on various transition state regulatory genes (degU, degQ, hpr, abrB, sinR), monitored by lacZ transcriptional fusions, are distinctive from those of subtilisin and other degradative enzymes. aprX is not essential for either growth or sporulation.    The trp RNA-binding Attenuation Protein (TRAP) from Bacillus subtilis binds a series of GAG and UAG repeats separated by 2-3 nonconserved spacer nucleotides in trp leader mRNA. To identify chemical groups on the RNA required for stability of the TRAP-RNA complex, we introduced several different nucleoside analogs into each pentamer of the RNA sequence 5&apos;-(UAGCC)-3&apos; repeated 11 times and measured their effect on the TRAP-RNA interaction. Deoxyribonucleoside substitutions revealed that a 2&apos;-hydroxyl group (2&apos;-OH) is required only on the guanosine occupying the third residue of the RNA triplets for high-affinity binding to TRAP. The remaining hydroxyl groups are dispensable. Base analog substitutions identified all of the exocyclic functional groups and N1 nitrogens of adenine and guanine in the second and third nucleotides, respectively, of the triplets as being involved in binding TRAP. In contrast, none of the substitutions made in the first residue caused any detectable changes in affinity, indicating that elements of these bases are not necessary for complex formation and stability. Studies using abasic nucleotides in the first residue of the triplets and in the two spacer residues confirmed that the majority of the specificity and stability of the TRAP-RNA complex is provided by the AG dinucleotide of the triplet repeats. In addition to direct effects on binding, we demonstrate that the N7-nitrogen of adenosine and guanosine in UAG triplet and the 2&apos;-OHs of (UAGCC)11 RNA are involved in the formation of an as yet undetermined structure that interferes with TRAP binding.    Reverse transcription (RT)-PCR is a valuable tool widely used for analysis of gene expression. In bacteria, RT-PCR is helpful beyond standard protocols of northern blot RNA/DNA hybridization (to identify transcripts) and primer extension (to locate their start points), as these methods have been difficult with transcripts that are low in abundance or unstable, similar to long multi-gene operons. In this report, RT-PCR is adapted to analyze transcripts that form long multi-gene operons--where they start and where they stop. The transcripts can also be semiquantitated to follow the expression of genes under different growth conditions. Examples using RT-PCR are presented with two different multi-gene systems for metal cation resistance to silver and mercury ions. The silver resistance system [9 open reading frames (ORFs); 12.5 kb] is shown by RT-PCR to synthesize three nonoverlapping messenger RNAs that are transcribed divergently. In the mercury resistance system (8 ORFs; 6.3 kb), all the genes are transcribed in the same orientation, and two promoter sites produce overlapping transcripts. For RT-PCR, reverse transcriptase enzyme is used to synthesize first-strand cDNA that is used as a template for PCR amplification of single-gene products, from the beginning, middle or end of long multi-gene, multi-transcript gene clusters.    Bacillus subtilis JH642 and a wild strain of B. subtilis called 22a both produce an antilisterial peptide that can be purified by anion-exchange and gel filtration chromatography. Amino acid analysis confirmed that the substance was the cyclic bacteriocin subtilosin. A mutant defective in production of the substance was isolated from a plasmid gene disruption library. The plasmid insertion conferring the antilisterial-peptide-negative phenotype was located in a seven-gene operon (alb, for antilisterial bacteriocin) residing immediately downstream from the sbo gene, which encodes the precursor of subtilosin. An insertion mutation in the sbo gene also conferred loss of antilisterial activity. Comparison of the presubtilosin and mature subtilosin sequences suggested that certain residues undergo unusual posttranslational modifications unlike those occurring during the synthesis of class I (lantibiotic) or some class II bacteriocins. The putative products of the genes of the operon identified show similarities to peptidases and transport proteins that may function in processing and export. Two alb gene products resemble proteins that function in pyrroloquinoline quinone biosynthesis. The use of lacZ-alb and lacZ-sbo gene fusions, along with primer extension analysis, revealed that the sbo-alb genes are transcribed from a major promoter, residing upstream of sbo, that is very likely utilized by the sigma(A) form of RNA polymerase. The sbo and alb genes are negatively regulated by the global transition state regulator AbrB and are also under positive autoregulation that is not mediated by the subtilosin peptide but instead requires one or more of the alb gene products.    We examined codon usage in Bacillus subtilis genes by multivariate analysis, quantified its cellular levels of individual tRNAs, and found a clear constraint of tRNA contents on synonymous codon choice. Individual tRNA levels were proportional to the copy number of the respective tRNA genes. This indicates that the tRNA gene copy number is an important factor to determine in cellular tRNA levels, which is common with Escherichia coli and yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Codon usage in 18 unicellular organisms whose genomes have been sequenced completely was analyzed and compared with the composition of tRNA genes. The 18 organisms are as follows: yeast S. cerevisiae, Aquifex aeolicus, Archaeoglobus fulgidus, B. subtilis, Borrelia burgdorferi, Chlamydia trachomatis, E. coli, Haemophilus influenzae, Helicobacterpylori, Methanococcusjannaschii, Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mycoplasma genitalium, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Pyrococcus horikoshii, Rickettsia prowazekii, Synechocystis sp., and Treponema pallidum. Codons preferred in highly expressed genes were related to the codons optimal for the translation process, which were predicted by the composition of isoaccepting tRNA genes. Genes with specific codon usage are discussed in connection with their evolutionary origins and functions. The origin and terminus of replication could be predicted on the basis of codon usage when the usage was analyzed relative to the transcription direction of individual genes.    Evidence against the Bm1P1 protein as a positive transcription factor for barbiturate-mediated induction of cytochrome P450(BM-1) in Bacillus megaterium has been provided in our previous report. In the present study, we show that the basal-level expression of the P450(BM-1) promoter-xylE transcriptional fusion is significantly reduced when the bm1P1 gene is present on the same plasmid. Moreover, disruption of the chromosomal bm1P1 gene results in enhanced expression of the P450(BM-1) promoter-xylE fusion on a multicopy plasmid. By using a binary vector system, we found that expression of the P450(BM-1) promoter-xylE fusion from a high-copy plasmid is substantially repressed by expression of bm1P1 from a low-copy plasmid. Taken together, these results suggest that the basal-level expression of P450(BM-1) is negatively affected by bm1P1. Possible mechanisms for this control are discussed.    A shift down in temperature causes in Streptomyces aureofaciens a transient repression of polypeptide synthesis. During the acclimation phase 32 proteins were synthesized. The addition of tetracycline (200 &amp;mgr;g/ml) to cells from exponential phase of growth leads to induction of 27 novel proteins and 17 upregulated proteins migrated in 2-D gel as proteins expressed upon cold shock. Immunoblot analysis using antibodies raised against CspB, CspC, and CspD of Bacillus subtilis revealed five cross-reactive proteins of the Csp family. Proteins CspB and CspD are predominantly induced at low temperature or by the presence of tetracycline. Expression of Csp proteins during the acclimation phase is regulated on the transcription level. Proteins of the Csp family have been shown to be associated with ribosomes and can be removed by 1 M NH(4)Cl. As expression of Csp proteins differs during development or temperature shift down, these proteins can be considered as trans-acting factors to form contacts with the coding region of specific mRNAs. Copyright 1999 Academic Press.    Polyclonal rabbit antibodies were generated to synthetic peptides corresponding to predicted B-cell epitopes of six proteins of the mce1 operon of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Antipeptide antibodies reacted with Mce1A and Mce1E fusion proteins in sonicates of recombinant Escherichia coli as well as with distinct bands in sonicates, but not in culture fluids of M. tuberculosis and M. bovis bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG). Polyvalent rabbit antibodies generated by immunization with sonicates of BCG bacilli reacted with synthetic peptides from the six Mce1 proteins on the solid phase in enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), albeit with different frequencies. The Mce1A peptide (p124-140) reacted most frequently, with seven of the nine antibodies tested, while the Mce1F peptide (p329-343) reacted with two. Used as a control, 20 polyclonal rabbit antibodies to 12 isolated proteins of M. tuberculosis and M. bovis BCG did not react with any of the six synthetic peptides, except in one case. mRNA expression of the six mce1A-mce1F genes of M. tuberculosis was demonstrated by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). These data indicate that all Mce1A-Mce1F proteins of the mce1 operon are expressed by in vitro-grown M. tuberculosis and M. bovis BCG.    The chromosomal mercury resistance determinant of Bacillus cereus RC607 confers resistance to inorganic mercury and to organomercurials. The order of genes in the completed mercury resistance determinant is operator-promoter 1 (O/P1) merR1 merT open reading frame 3 (ORF3) ORF4 merA O/P2 merR2 merB2 merB1. The previously undetermined 1-kb DNA sequence between the merA and merB1 genes includes two significant ORFs, whose predicted protein products are homologous with MerR (the transcriptional regulator) and MerB (the organomercurial lyase enzyme). Two transcriptional start sites (promoters), O/P1 at the beginning of the determinant and O/P2 immediately upstream of the sixth ORF, the newly identified merR2, were mapped by reverse transcriptase (RT) primer extension. A long 6.3-kb mRNA traversing all eight ORFs was shown by RT-PCR. Growth sensitivity measurements in liquid media and cellular mercury volatization assays characterized inducibility and differences in functional activity in B. cereus RC607 and after cloning of the mer determinant into plasmids in Escherichia coli.    The Bacillus subtilis des gene encodes the cold-inducible Delta5 lipid desaturase involved in the formation of unsaturated fatty acids from saturated phospholipid precursors. Here, we describe the expression pattern of the des gene in response to a temperature downshift from 37 to 20 degrees C. We found that the synthesis of des mRNA is undetectable at 37 degrees C but dramatically induced upon the temperature downshift. Decay characteristics of the des transcript as well as the in vivo decay of B. subtilis bulk mRNA were investigated. The results showed that the stability of the des transcript as well as of bulk mRNA lasted substantially longer at 20 degrees C than at 37 degrees C. Functional expression of des at 37 degrees C was achieved by exchanging its promoter with the non-cold shock spac promoter. These data provide the first direct evidence that temperature-mediated control of transcription is the major mechanism regulating the mRNA levels of the B. subtilis desaturase. The present results also demonstrate that the only component of the desaturation system regulated by temperature is the desaturase enzyme.    In Bacillus subtilis, the products of the pta and ackA genes, phosphotransacetylase and acetate kinase, play a crucial role in the production of acetate, one of the most abundant by-products of carbon metabolism in this gram-positive bacterium. Although these two enzymes are part of the same pathway, only mutants with inactivated ackA did not grow in the presence of glucose. Inactivation of pta had only a weak inhibitory effect on growth. In contrast to pta and ackA in Escherichia coli, the corresponding B. subtilis genes are not cotranscribed. Expression of the pta gene was increased in the presence of glucose, as has been reported for ackA. The effects of the predicted cis-acting catabolite response element (CRE) located upstream from the promoter and of the trans-acting proteins CcpA, HPr, Crh, and HPr kinase on the catabolite regulation of pta were investigated. As for ackA, glucose activation was abolished in ccpA and hprK mutants and in the ptsH1 crh double mutant. Footprinting experiments demonstrated an interaction between CcpA and the pta CRE sequence, which is almost identical to the proposed CRE consensus sequence. This interaction occurs only in the presence of Ser-46-phosphorylated HPr (HPrSer-P) or Ser-46-phosphorylated Crh (CrhSer-P) and fructose-1,6-bisphosphate (FBP). In addition to CcpA, carbon catabolite activation of the pta gene therefore requires at least two other cofactors, FBP and either HPr or Crh, phosphorylated at Ser-46 by the ATP-dependent Hpr kinase.    Phosphorylation of aspartic acid residues is the hallmark of two- component signal transduction systems that orchestrate the adaptive responses of micro-organisms to changes in their surroundings. Two-component systems consist of a sensor kinase that interprets environmental signals and a response regulator that activates the appropriate physiological response. Although structures of response regulators are known, little is understood about their activated phosphorylated forms, due to the intrinsic instability of the acid phosphate linkage. Here, we report the phosphorylated structure of the receiver/phosphoacceptor domain of Spo0A, the master regulator of sporulation, from Bacillus stearothermophilus. The phosphoryl group is covalently bonded to the invariant aspartate 55, and co-ordinated to a nearby divalent metal cation, with both species fulfilling their electrostatic potential through interactions with solvent water molecules, the protein main chain, and with side-chains of amino acid residues strongly conserved across the response regulator family. This is the first direct visualisation of a phosphoryl group covalently linked to an aspartic acid residue in any protein, with implications for signalling within the response regulator family. Copyright 1999 Academic Press.    The dnaK operon from Bacillus subtilis and other Gram-positive bacteria with low G + C DNA content contains additional heat-shock genes, including hrcA. The hrcA gene encodes a transcription factor that negatively regulates heat-shock genes and is uniformly present in all Gram-positive bacteria studied to date. An hrcA homologue is also present in Synechocystis species, Leptospira interrogans, Chlamydia trachomatis, Caulobacter crescentus and Methanococcus jannaschii, organisms that diverged early on from the common ancestor of all Gram-positive bacteria and Proteobacteria, according to 16S rRNA phylogeny. A partial, protein-based phylogenetic tree, derived using amino acid sequence homology of hrcA proteins from Gram-positive bacteria, is presented here, and the results are compared with the phylogenetic trees generated from 16S rRNA, dnaK and dnaJ sequences. The location of the hrcA gene and the genome organization of the dnaK operon support the division of all Gram-positive bacteria into three major groups: one group contains high-G + C Gram-positive bacteria, and two others contain low-G + C Gram-positive bacteria. Among the Gram-positive bacteria with low G + C DNA content, the results indicate that there is a close phylogenetic relationship between Bacillus species and Clostridium species on the one hand and between Lactococcus lactis and Streptococcus mutans on the other. Streptomyces and Mycobacterium species also exhibited a close relationship. A hierarchical arrangement of Gram-positive bacteria based on HrcA sequences is proposed as an additional refinement of the phylogenetic relationships within this important bacterial group.    In Bacillus subtilis, 14 of the 24 genes encoding aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRS) are regulated by tRNA-mediated antitermination in response to starvation for their cognate aminoacid. Their transcripts have an untranslated leader mRNA of about 300 nucleotides, including alternative and mutually exclusive terminator-antiterminator structures, just upstream from the translation initiation site. Following antitermination, some of these transcripts are cleaved leaving at the 5&apos;-end of the mature mRNAs, stable secondary structures that can protect them against degradation. Although most B. subtilis aaRS genes are expressed as monocistronic mRNAs, the gltX gene encoding the glutamyl-tRNA synthetase is cotranscribed with cysE and cysS encoding serine acetyl-transferase and cysteinyl-tRNA synthetase, respectively. Transcription of gltX is not controlled by a tRNA, but tRNA(CyS)-mediated antitermination regulates the elongation of transcription into cysE and cysS. The full-length gltX-cysE-cysS transcript is then cleaved into a monocistronic gltX mRNA and a cysE-cysS mRNA.    Expression of the Bacillus subtilis ptsGHI operon is controlled by transcriptional antitermination mediated by the antiterminator protein GlcT. The antiterminator is inactivated in the absence of glucose, presumably by phosphorylation. A conditional terminator in the ptsG mRNA leader region has been identified. Mutations in this terminator resulted in constitutive expression of the operon. The terminator is overlapped by an inverted repeat (called ribonucleic-antiterminator, RAT) which is thought to form a stem-loop structure upon binding of the antiterminator protein GlcT. The N-terminal 60 amino acid residues of GlcT are able to bind to the RAT and prevent transcriptional termination in vivo. Sequence-specific interaction between the RNA-binding domain and the RAT was demonstrated by surface plasmon resonance analysis. Mutations affecting the RNA-binding domain were isolated and will be discussed with respect to their consequences for dimerization and RNA binding. Copyright 1999 Academic Press.    In Bacillus subtilis, nucleosides are readily taken up from the growth medium and metabolized. The key enzymes in nucleoside catabolism are nucleoside phosphorylases, phosphopentomutase, and deoxyriboaldolase. The characterization of two closely linked loci, drm and pupG, which encode phosphopentomutase (Drm) and guanosine (inosine) phosphorylase (PupG), respectively, is reported here. When expressed in Escherichia coli mutant backgrounds, drm and pupG confer phosphopentomutase and purine-nucleoside phosphorylase activity. Northern blot and enzyme analyses showed that drm and pupG form a dicistronic operon. Both enzymes are induced when nucleosides are present in the growth medium. Using mutants deficient in nucleoside catabolism, it was demonstrated that the low-molecular-mass effectors of this induction most likely were deoxyribose 5-phosphate and ribose 5-phosphate. Both Drm and PupG activity levels were higher when succinate rather than glucose served as the carbon source, indicating that the expression of the operon is subject to catabolite repression. Primer extension analysis identified two transcription initiation signals upstream of drm; both were utilized in induced and non-induced cells. The nucleoside-catabolizing system in B. subtilis serves to utilize the base for nucleotide synthesis while the pentose moiety serves as the carbon source. When added alone, inosine barely supports growth of B. subtilis. This slow nucleoside catabolism contrasts with that of E. coli, which grows rapidly on a nucleoside as a carbon source. When inosine was added with succinate or deoxyribose, however, a significant increase in growth was observed in B. subtilis. The findings of this study therefore indicate that the B. subtilis system for nucleoside catabolism differs greatly from the well-studied system in E. coli.    In bacteria, adaptive responses to environmental stimuli are often initiated by two-component signal transduction systems (TCS). The prototypical TCS comprises two proteins: a histidine kinase (HK, hk) and a response regulator (RR rr). Recent research has suggested that compounds that inhibit two-component systems might have good antibacterial activity. In order to identify TCS that are crucial for growth or virulence of Streptococcus pneumoniae, we have examined the genomic sequence of a virulent S. pneumoniae strain for genes that are related to known histidine kinases or response regulators. Altogether 13 histidine kinases and 13 response regulators have been identified. The protein sequences encoded by these genes were compared with sequences deposited in public databases. This analysis revealed that two of the 13 pneumococcal TCSs have been described before (ciaRH and comDE) and two are homologous to the yycFG and the phoRP genes of Bacillus subtilis. All the pneumococcal response regulators contain putative DNA binding motifs within the C-terminal output domain, implying that they are involved in transcriptional control. Two of these response regulators are obviously the first representatives of a new subfamily containing an AraC-type DNA-binding effector domain. To assess the regulatory role of these transcription factors, we disrupted each of the 13 response regulator genes by insertional mutagenesis. All the viable mutant strains with disrupted response regulator genes were further characterized with regard to growth in vitro, competence, and experimental virulence. Two response regulator genes could not be inactivated, indicating that they may regulate essential cellular functions. The possibility of using these systems as targets for the development of novel antibacterials will be discussed.    In Bacillus subtilis, the genes that depend on sigma K-RNA polymerase for their transcription are expressed in the mother cell compartment at later stages of sporulation. More than a dozen genes belonging to the sigma K regulon have been identified. Here I describe the identification of two additional promoters under the control of sigma K-RNA polymerase. Using a set of histidine-tagged RNA polymerases prepared from cells harvested at various times during the course of growth and sporulation (Fujita, M., Sadaie, Y., 1998. Gene 221, 185-190), transcription initiated from putative promoter sequences on a number of DNA fragments, as inferred from genome sequencing, was examined in vitro. One of these showed sigma K-dependent transcription. For further characterization of transcription initiated from this site, in vitro transcription analysis was performed using RNA polymerase holoenzyme reconstituted from purified sigma K and core RNA polymerase. Two sigma K-dependent promoters, yfhP P1 and yfhP P2, separated by a distance of about 15 bp, were thereby identified. These promoters are located immediately upstream of the yfhP gene that encodes a protein of unknown function consisting of 327 amino acids residues. The promoter strength, the rate of open complex formation and the RNA polymerase binding affinity were examined for these two promoters in comparison with other known sigma K-dependent promoters, gerE and cotD. The promoter strength displayed was in the order of gerE &gt; cotD &gt; yfhP P2 &gt; yfhP P1.    The outcome of collisions between Bacillus subtilis phage Phi29 DNA polymerase and oppositely oriented transcription complexes has been studied in vitro. We found that the replication fork was unable to go past a transcription ternary complex stalled head-on. However, head-on collisions did not lead to a deadlock. Both DNA and RNA polymerase remained bound to the template and, when the halted transcription complex was allowed to move, the replication machinery resumed normal elongation. These results suggested that a replication fork that encounters an RNA polymerase head-on whose movement is not impeded would bypass the transcription machinery. Our results for head-on collisions between concurrently moving replication and transcription complexes are indeed consistent with the existence of a resolving mechanism. The ability of Phi29 DNA polymerase to resolve head-on collisions with itself during symmetrical replication of Phi29 DNA in vivo is likely to be related to its ability to pass a head-on oriented RNA polymerase.    Protein p6 is a nonspecific DNA-binding protein occurring in high abundance in phage phi29-infected cells. Here, we demonstrate a novel role for this versatile histone-like protein: its involvement in regulating the viral switch between early and late transcription. p6 performs this role by exhibiting a reciprocal functional interaction with the regulatory protein p4, also phage encoded, which is required for repression of the early A2b and A2c promoters and activation of the late A3 promoter. On the one hand, p6 promotes p4-mediated repression of the A2b promoter and activation of the A3 promoter by enhancing binding of p4 to its recognition site at PA3; on the other, p4 promotes p6-mediated repression of the A2c promoter by favoring the formation of a stable p6-nucleoprotein complex that interferes with RNA polymerase binding to PA2c. We propose that the observed interplay between proteins p6 and p4 is based on their DNA architectural properties.    Incorporation of 5-(hydroxymethyl)-2&apos;-deoxyuridine into DNA in place of thymine by SPO1, a Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage, allows the viral DNA to bind selectively to transcription factor 1. We have synthesized a TF1-binding site: d(5&apos;-ACCHACHCHHHGHAGGT-3&apos;)-d(5&apos;-ACCHACAAAGAGHAGGT-3&apos;) and studied this molecule using NMR spectroscopy. The chemical shifts of exchangeable and non-exchangeable protons were sequentially assigned. Absence of corresponding NOEs in the imino-imino region suggested that the end base pairs did not form Watson-Crick hydrogen bond. Restrained molecular dynamics calculation yielded a family of B-DNA structures whose r.m.s.d. was 0.66 A (all atoms) for the internal 15 bp. The helical twist was 38.5 degrees per step. The base pairs were situated directly on the helix axis (X-displacement = -0.2 A). All sugars exhibited C2&apos;-endo puckering with P = 167.3 degrees and upsilon(max)= 38.2 degrees. The OH groups of all hmU bases resided on the 3&apos; side of the base plane and may affect the base orientation relative to the sugar plane as the average chi value for all hmU was 4 degrees more positive than that of other nucleosides (258 degrees versus 254 degrees ). Positive roll angles (rho) and small flanking twists (omega) at hmU suggested that the two hmU-A base pair steps open toward the minor grooves.    The dnaK gene region of Bacillus sphaericus was cloned as a 3.8 kb HindIII fragment and an overlapping 1.7 kb EcoRI fragment by using an internal B. sphaericus specific dnaK gene probe generated by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Complete DNA sequencing of the two fragments revealed three complete open reading frames (ORFs). These ORFs exhibited a high degree of identity to the grpE dnaK, and dnaJ heat shock genes from other gram-positive bacteria. The order of the genes was found to be grpE-dnaK-dnaJ. Additionally, the 5&apos;-end and 3&apos;-end contained amino acid sequences that were homologous to the C-terminal sequence of the hrcA gene and the N-terminal sequence of ORF35 (yqeT), respectively, from Bacillus subtilis. The entire hrcA gene from B. sphaericus was then isolated by high-fidelity PCR and completely sequenced. A transcription stop site is located between the dnaK and dnaJ genes but not after the dnaJ gene. Consistent with this observation, the dnaJ gene is immediately followed by an ORF that shows a high degree of identity to ORF35 from B. subtilis, Staphylococcus aureus, and Clostridium acetobutylicum. The presence of ORF35 is not indicated in other genera representing the gram-positive bacteria. The amino acid sequence of ORF35 exhibited nearly 30% identity with the methyltransferase for large subunit ribosomal protein L11 from gram-negative Proteobacteria and the related protein from cyanobacteria, other gram-negative bacteria, and Archaea, suggesting the presence of the gene for this protein in the common ancestor of Bacteria and Archaea. The absence of the ORF35 gene in Mycobacterium tuberculosis and other gram-positive bacteria indicates that the loss of this gene must have occurred in an ancestor of other gram-positive bacteria following their divergence from the ancestor of Bacillus/Clostridium/staphylococcus lineage.    The small acidic proteins CspB and CspC are the major cold shock-induced proteins of Bacillus subtilis. Analysis of mRNA revealed a transient four-fold increase in the transcription level of both genes during cold shock. The cspB and cspC mRNAs are dramatically stabilised after a temperature downshift from 37 degrees C to 15 degrees C. The data in this study support the idea that the expression of CspB and CspC in B. subtilis during cold shock is regulated mainly at the post-transcriptional level, as is also the case with CspA in Escherichia coli.    The cytoplasmic accumulation of exogenous betaine stimulates the growth of Lactococcus lactis cultivated under hyperosmotic conditions. We report that L. lactis possesses a single betaine transport system that belongs to the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) superfamily of transporters. Through transposon mutagenesis, a mutant deficient in betaine transport was isolated. We identified two genes, busAA and busAB, grouped in an operon, busA (betaine uptake system). The transcription of busA is strongly regulated by the external osmolality of the medium. The busAA gene codes for the ATP-binding protein. busAB encodes a 573-residue polypeptide which presents two striking features: (i) a fusion between the regions encoding the transmembrane domain (TMD) and the substrate-binding domain (SBD) and (ii) a swapping of the SBD subdomains when compared to the Bacillus subtilis betaine-binding protein, OpuAC. BusA of L. lactis displays a high affinity towards betaine (K(m) = 1.7 microM) and is an osmosensor whose activity is tightly regulated by external osmolality, leading the betaine uptake capacity of L. lactis to be under dual control at the biochemical and genetic levels. A protein presenting the characteristics predicted for BusAB was detected in the membrane fraction of L. lactis. The fusion between the TMD and the SBD is the first example of a new organization within prokaryotic ABC transporters.    Bacillus subtilis produces a 30-kDa peptidoglycan hydrolase, CwlH, during the late sporulation phase. Disruption of yqeE led to a complete loss of CwlH formation, indicating the identity of yqeE with cwlH. Northern blot analysis of cwlH revealed a 0.8-kb transcript after 6 to 7.5 h for the wild-type strain but not for the sigma(F), sigma(E), sigma(G), and sigma(K) mutants. Expression of the sigma(K)-dependent cwlH gene depended on gerE. Primer extension analysis also suggested that cwlH is transcribed by Esigma(K) RNA polymerase. CwlH produced in Escherichia coli harboring a cwlH plasmid is an N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanine amidase (EC 3.5.1.28) and exhibited an optimum pH of 7.0 and high-level binding to the B. subtilis cell wall. A cwlC cwlH double mutation led to a lack of mother cell lysis even after 7 days of incubation in DSM medium, but the single mutations led to mother cell lysis after 24 h.    A 1.0 kilobase gene fragment from the genomic DNA of an alkaliphilic thermophilic Bacillus was found to code for a functional xylanase (XynII). The complete nucleotide sequence including the structural gene and the 5&apos; and 3&apos; flanking sequences of the xylanase gene have been determined. An open reading frame starting from ATG initiator codon comprising 402 nucleotides gave a preprotein of 133 amino acids of calculated molecular mass 14.090 kDa. The occurrence of three potential N-glycosylation sites in XynII gene is a unique feature for a gene of bacterial origin. The stop codon was followed by hairpin loop structures indicating the presence of transcription termination signals. The secondary structure analysis of XynII predicted that the polypeptide was primarily formed of beta-sheets. XynII appeared to be a member of family G/11 of xylanases based on its molecular weight and basic pI (8.0). However, sequence homology revealed similar identity with families 10 and 11 of xylanases. The conserved triad (Val-Val-Xaa, where Xaa is Asn or Asp) was identified only in the xylanases from alkaliphilic organisms. Our results implicate for the first time the concept of convergent evolution for XynII and provide a basis for research in evolutionary relationship among the xylanases from alkaliphilic and neutrophilic organisms. Copyright 1999 Academic Press.    The gene katX, which encodes a catalase in Bacillus subtilis, is transcribed by EsigmaF in the pre-spore. This catalase is responsible for the resistance to hydrogen peroxide shown by germinating and outgrowing spores. We demonstrated that katX is also a sigmaB-dependent general stress gene, since it is strongly induced by heat, salt and ethanol stress, as well as by energy depletion. The -10 and -35 sequences of the sigmaB- and sigmaF-dependent promoters of katX overlap, and the transcriptional start points used by EsigmaB and EsigmaF differ by only one nucleotide. Our results indicate that the level of KatX level in outgrowing spores depends mainly on EsigmaF, because sigB mutants show normal KatX activity in dormant and outgrowing spores. katX mutants also develop the non-specific resistance to oxidative stress that is typical of glucose-starved cells. Therefore, the physiological role of sigmaB-dependent katX expression remains obscure. The results indicate an overlap between the sigmaB regulon and the sigmaF regulon, and the physiological implications of this overlap are discussed.    The trp RNA-binding attenuation protein (TRAP) regulates expression of the tryptophan biosynthetic genes of several bacilli by binding single-stranded RNA. The binding sequence is composed of eleven triplet repeats, predominantly GAG, separated by two or three non-conserved nucleotides. Here we present the crystal structure of a complex of TRAP and a 53-base single-stranded RNA containing eleven GAG triplets, revealing that each triplet is accommodated in a binding pocket formed by beta-strands. In the complex, the RNA has an extended structure without any base-pairing and binds to the protein mostly by specific protein-base interactions. Eleven binding pockets on the circular TRAP 11-mer form a belt with a diameter of about 80 A. This simple but elegant mechanism of arresting the RNA segment by encircling it around a protein disk is applicable to both transcription, when TRAP binds the nascent RNA, and to translation, when TRAP binds the same sequence within a non-coding leader region of the messenger RNA.    sigma(E), a mother cell-specific transcription factor of sporulating Bacillus subtilis, is derived from an inactive precursor protein (pro-sigma(E)). Activation of sigma(E) occurs when a sporulation-specific protease (SpoIIGA) cleaves 27 amino acids from the pro-sigma(E) amino terminus. This reaction is believed to take place at the mother cell-forespore septum. Using a chimera of pro-sigma(E) and green fluorescent protein (GFP) to visualize the intracellular location of pro-sigma(E) by fluorescence microscopy, and lysozyme treatment to separate the mother cell and forespore compartments, we determined that the pro-sigma(E)::GFP signal, localized to the forespore septum prior to lysozyme treatment, is restricted to the mother cell compartment after treatment. Thus, pro-sigma(E)::GFP had been sequestered to the mother cell side of the septum. This segregation of pro-sigma(E)::GFP, and presumably pro-sigma(E), to the mother cell is likely to be the reason why sigma(E) activity is restricted to that compartment.    Three asparagine synthetase genes, asnB, asnH, and asnO (yisO), were predicted from the sequence of the Bacillus subtilis genome. We show here that the three genes are expressed differentially during cell growth. In a rich sporulation medium, expression of asnB was detected only during exponential growth, that of asnH was drastically elevated at the transition between exponential growth and stationary phase, and that of asnO was seen only later in sporulation. In a minimal medium, both asnB and asnH were expressed constitutively during exponential growth and in stationary phase, while the expression of asnO was not detected in either phase. However, when the minimal medium was supplemented with asparagine, only the expression of asnH was partially repressed. Transcription analyses revealed that asnB was possibly cotranscribed with a downstream gene, ytnA, while the asnH gene was transcribed as the fourth gene of an operon comprising yxbB, yxbA, yxnB, asnH, and yxaM. The asnO gene is a monocistronic operon, the expression of which was dependent on one of the sporulation sigma factors, sigma-E. Each of the three genes, carried on a low-copy-number plasmid, complemented the asparagine deficiency of an Escherichia coli strain lacking asparagine synthetases, indicating that all encode an asparagine synthetase. In B. subtilis, deletion of asnO or asnH, singly or in combination, had essentially no effect on growth rates in media with or without asparagine. In contrast, deletion of asnB led to a slow-growth phenotype, even in the presence of asparagine. A strain lacking all three genes still grew without asparagine, albeit very slowly, implying that B. subtilis might have yet another asparagine synthetase, not recognized by sequence analysis. The strains lacking asnO failed to sporulate, indicating an involvement of this gene in sporulation.    Previous characterization of Bacillus subtilis hemN, encoding a protein involved in oxygen-independent coproporphyrinogen III decarboxylation, indicated the presence of a second hemN-like gene (B. Hippler, G. Homuth, T. Hoffmann, C. Hungerer, W. Schumann, and D. Jahn, J. Bacteriol. 179:7181-7185, 1997). The corresponding hemZ gene was found to be split into the two potential open reading frames yhaV and yhaW by a sequencing error of the genome sequencing project. The hemZ gene, encoding a 501-amino-acid protein with a calculated molecular mass of 57,533 Da, complemented a Salmonella typhimurium hemF hemN double mutant under aerobic and anaerobic growth conditions. A B. subtilis hemZ mutant accumulated coproporphyrinogen III under anaerobic growth conditions. A hemN hemZ double mutant exhibited normal aerobic and anaerobic growth, indicating the presence of a third alternative oxygen-independent enzymatic system for coproporphyrinogen III oxidation. The hemY gene, encoding oxygen-dependent protoporphyrinogen IX oxidase with coproporphyrinogen III oxidase side activity, did not significantly contribute to this newly identified system. Growth behavior of hemY mutants revealed the presence of an oxygen-independent protoporphyrinogen IX oxidase in B. subtilis. A monocistronic hemZ mRNA, starting 31 bp upstream of the translational start codon, was detected. Reporter gene fusions of hemZ and hemN demonstrated a fivefold anaerobic induction of both genes under nitrate ammonifying growth conditions. No anaerobic induction was observed for fermentatively growing B. subtilis. The B. subtilis redox regulatory systems encoded by resDE, fnr, and ywiD were indispensable for the observed transcriptional induction. A redox regulation cascade proceeding from an unknown sensor via resDE, through fnr and ywiD to hemN/hemZ, is suggested for the observed coregulation of heme biosynthesis and the anaerobic respiratory energy metabolism. Finally, only hemZ was found to be fivefold induced by the presence of H(2)O(2), indicating further coregulation of heme biosynthesis with the formation of the tetrapyrrole enzyme catalase.    The review discusses the Po-independent antitermination in E. coli and B. subtilis. The functional role of antiterminators BglG (in E. coli), SacY, SacT, BglG, LicT, and GlcT (in B. subtilis) is described. Special attention is paid to the role of antiterminators in connection with the phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent phosphotransferase system involved in the carbohydrate transport in bacteria.    DegR is a positive regulator for degradative enzyme synthesis in Bacillus subtilis. The degR gene is transcribed by RNA polymerase containing delta D, and the level of its expression is low in a mecA-deficient mutant. In a search for suppressors of the mecA effect through mini-Tn10 transposon mutagenesis, a lacR mutation designated lacR288 was discovered. The B. subtilis lacR gene encodes the repressor for lacA which specifies beta-galactosidase, and therefore, inactivation of the lacR gene results in overproduction of the enzyme. In the lacR288 mutant, however, the expression of lacA was at a negligible level, indicating that the repressor activity was not destroyed by the mutation. The putative gene product of the lacR288-containing gene is a 288-amino acid protein lacking the C-terminal 42 amino acids of intact LacR and carries no extra amino acids derived from the transposon sequence. The suppression by lacR288 of the decreased degR expression in the mecA background was found to be caused by an increase in the delta D level as shown by Western blot analysis. Furthermore, the increase was due to post-transcriptional regulation of sigD, the gene encoding delta D, as revealed by using both transcriptional and translational sigD-lacZ fusions. The lacR288 mutation had no effect on the stability of the delta D protein. Based on these results we conclude that the lacR288 mutation stimulates sigD expression at the translational level.    The trp RNA-binding attenuation protein (TRAP) regulates expression of the Bacillus subtilis trpEDCFBA operon by transcription attenuation. Tryptophan-activated TRAP binds to the nascent trp leader transcript by interacting with 11 (G/U)AG repeats. TRAP binding prevents formation of an antiterminator structure, thereby promoting formation of an overlapping terminator, and hence transcription is terminated before RNA polymerase can reach the trp structural genes. In addition to the antiterminator and terminator, a stem-loop structure is predicted to form at the 5&apos; end of the trp leader transcript. Deletion of this structure resulted in a dramatic increase in expression of a trpE&apos;-&apos;lacZ translational fusion and a reduced ability to regulate expression in response to tryptophan. By introducing a series of point mutations in the 5&apos; stem-loop, we found that both the sequence and the structure of the hairpin are important for its regulatory function and that compensatory changes that restored base pairing partially restored wild-type-like expression levels. Our results indicate that the 5&apos; stem-loop functions primarily through the TRAP-dependent regulatory pathway. Gel shift results demonstrate that the 5&apos; stem-loop increases the affinity of TRAP for trp leader RNA four- to fivefold, suggesting that the 5&apos; structure interacts with TRAP. In vitro transcription results indicate that this 5&apos; structure functions in the attenuation mechanism, since deletion of the stem-loop caused an increase in transcription readthrough. An oligonucleotide complementary to a segment of the 5&apos; stem-loop was used to demonstrate that formation of the 5&apos; structure is required for proper attenuation control of this operon.    A consensus-directed search for sigma(B) promoters was used to locate potential candidates for new sigma(B)-dependent genes in Bacillus subtilis. Screening of those candidates by oligonucleotide hybridizations with total RNA from exponentially growing or ethanol-stressed cells of the wild type as well as a sigB mutant revealed 22 genes that required sigma(B) for induction by ethanol. Although almost 50% of the proteins encoded by the newly discovered sigma(B)-dependent stress genes seem to be membrane localized, biochemical functions have so far not been defined for any of the gene products. Allocation of the genes to the sigma(B)-dependent stress regulon may indicate a potential function in the establishment of a multiple stress resistance. AldY and YhdF show similarities to NAD(P)-dependent dehydrogenases and YdbP to thioredoxins, supporting our suggestion that sigma(B)-dependent proteins may be involved in the maintenance of the intracellular redox balance after stress.    A Treponema denticola 9.6-kb motility locus containing 11 genes was identified, sequenced and analyzed. The genes were designated tap1, flgD, flgE, orf4, motA, motB, fliL, fliM, fliY, orf10 and fliP. The order of these genes is identical to that of the corresponding region of the Treponema pallidum fla operon. Seven of the deduced Fla proteins share significant homology with both Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis proteins associated with flagellar structure and function. Reverse transcription-PCR analysis indicated that the T. denticola fla genes are transcribed as a single unit. A putative sigma(28)-like promoter, virtually identical to the T. pallidum fla promoter, was identified upstream of tap1. These results showed that the T. denticola and T. pallidum fla operons are highly conserved, supporting the proposed phylogenetic relatedness of these spirochetes.    Mammalian natural resistance-associated macrophage protein (Nramp) homologues are important determinants of susceptibility to infection by diverse intracellular pathogens including mycobacteria. Eukaryotic Nramp homologues transport divalent cations such as Fe(2+), Mn(2+), Zn(2+), and Cu(2+). Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Mycobacterium bovis (bacillus Calmette-Guerin [BCG]) also encode an Nramp homologue (Mramp). RNA encoding Mramp induces approximately 20-fold increases in (65)Zn(2+) and (55)Fe(2+) uptake when injected into Xenopus laevis oocytes. Transport is dependent on acidic extracellular pH and is maximal between pH 5.5 and 6.5. Mramp-mediated (65)Zn(2+) and (55)Fe(2+) transport is abolished by an excess of Mn(2+) and Cu(2+), confirming that Mramp interacts with a broad range of divalent transition metal cations. Using semiquantitative reverse transcription PCR, we show that Mramp mRNA levels in M. tuberculosis are upregulated in response to increases in ambient Fe(2+) and Cu(2+) between &lt;1 and 5 microM concentrations and that this upregulation occurs in parallel with mRNA for y39, a putative metal-transporting P-type ATPase. Using a quantitative ratiometric PCR technique, we demonstrate a fourfold decrease in Mramp/y39 mRNA ratios from organisms grown in 5-70 microM Cu(2+). M. bovis BCG cultured axenically and within THP-1 cells also expresses mRNA encoding Mramp. Mramp exemplifies a novel prokaryotic class of metal ion transporter. Within phagosomes, Mramp and Nramp1 may compete for the same divalent cations, with implications for intracellular survival of mycobacteria.    Early in the process of spore formation in Bacillus subtilis, asymmetric cell division produces a large mother cell and a much smaller prespore. Differentiation of the prespore is initiated by activation of an RNA polymerase sigma factor, sigmaF, specifically in that cell. sigmaF is controlled by a regulatory cascade involving an anti-sigma factor, SpoIIAB, an anti-anti-sigma factor, SpoIIAA, and a membrane-bound phosphatase, SpoIIE, which converts the inactive, phosphorylated form of SpoIIAA back to the active form. SpoIIE is required for proper asymmetric division and much of the protein is sequestered into the prespore during septation. Importantly, activation of sigmaF is dependent on formation of the asymmetric septum. We have now characterized this morphological checkpoint in detail, using strains affected in cell division and/or spoIIE function. Surprisingly, we found that significant dephosphorylation of SpoIIAA occurred even in the absence of septation. This shows that the SpoIIE phosphatase is at least partially active independent of the morphological event and also that cells can tolerate significant levels of unphosphorylated SpoIIAA without activating sigmaF. We also describe a spoIIE mutant in which the checkpoint is bypassed, probably by an increase in the dephosphorylation of SpoIIAA. Taken together, the results support the idea that sequestration of SpoIIE protein into the prespore plays an important role in the control of sigmaF activation and in coupling this activation to septation.    The non-haemolytic enterotoxin from Bacillus cereus has been sequenced. It is composed of three components, non-haemolytic enterotoxin A, B and C of 41.0, 39.8 and 36.5 kDa, respectively. Transcription of the operon seems to be positively regulated by plcR, a gene that also regulates phospholipase C expression. There is substantial similarity between the three proteins of non-haemolytic enterotoxin and between the non-haemolytic enterotoxin and haemolytic enterotoxin proteins.    We demonstrate that the cccB gene, identified in the Bacillus subtilis genome sequence project, is the structural gene for a 10-kDa membrane-bound cytochrome c(551) lipoprotein described for the first time in B. subtilis. Apparently, CccB corresponds to cytochrome c(551) of the thermophilic bacterium Bacillus PS3. The heme domain of B. subtilis cytochrome c(551) is very similar to that of cytochrome c(550), a protein encoded by the cccA gene and anchored to the membrane by a single transmembrane polypeptide segment. Thus, B. subtilis contains two small, very similar, c-type cytochromes with different types of membrane anchors. The cccB gene is cotranscribed with the yvjA gene, and transcription is repressed by glucose. Mutants deleted for cccB or yvjA-cccB show no apparent growth, sporulation, or germination defect. YvjA is not required for the synthesis of cytochrome c(551), and its function remains unknown.    The aconitase protein of Bacillus subtilis was able to bind specifically to sequences resembling the iron response elements (IREs) found in eukaryotic mRNAs. The sequences bound include the rabbit ferritin IRE and IRE-like sequences in the B. subtilis operons that encode the major cytochrome oxidase and an iron uptake system. IRE binding activity was affected by the availability of iron both in vivo and in vitro. In eukaryotic cells, aconitase-like proteins regulate translation and stability of iron metabolism mRNAs in response to iron availability. A mutant strain of B. subtilis that produces an enzymatically inactive aconitase that was still able to bind RNA sporulated 40x more efficiently than did an aconitase null mutant, suggesting that a nonenzymatic activity of aconitase is important for sporulation. The results support the idea that bacterial aconitases, like their eukaryotic homologs, are bifunctional proteins, showing aconitase activity in the presence of iron and RNA binding activity when cells are iron-deprived.    The rocG gene of Bacillus subtilis, encoding a catabolic glutamate dehydrogenase, is transcribed by SigL (sigma(54))-containing RNA polymerase and requires for its expression RocR, a member of the NtrC/NifA family of proteins that bind to enhancer-like elements, called upstream activating sequences (UAS). Unlike the case for other sigma(54)-dependent genes, rocG has no UAS; instead, its expression depends on a sequence located 1.5 kilobases downstream of the rocG promoter, beyond the end of the rocG coding region. The same sequence also serves as the UAS for the downstream rocABC operon and can activate rocG if moved upstream of its promoter. Furthermore, the activating sequence can be moved as far as 15 kilobases downstream of the rocG promoter and still retain partial activity.    The promoter -10 binding region of the Bacillus subtilis sigma(A) factor forms an amphiphilic alpha-helix with three conserved isoleucines located at four-residue intervals. To investigate the structural and functional roles of the three isoleucine residues, we constructed a series of sigA mutants with single and double Ile-to-Ala substitutions on the hydrophobic face of this alpha-helix and isolated intragenic revertants with either same-site or second-site suppressor that partially restores the structural stability and transcription activity of the mutant sigma(A) factors. Our data show that the three conserved isoleucine residues (Ile-194, Ile-198, and Ile-202) are involved in the hydrophobic core packing of sigma(A); they affect differentially and additively the structure and function of sigma(A), with the central isoleucine residue (Ile-198) playing the most important role. By analogy with the crystal structure of a sigma(70) peptide, it is apparent that interdigital interactions exist between the three conserved isoleucine residues and certain hydrophobic amino acids in region 2. 1 of sigma(A). They include at least the van der Waals contacts between Ile-194 and both Leu-145 and Ile-149, between Ile-198 and both Ile-149 and Tyr-153, as well as between Ile-202 and Tyr-153. The same-site suppressors, Val-194 and Val-198, restore the structural stability and transcription activity of sigma(A) by repacking the hydrophobic core of sigma(A). The second-site suppressor (S291F) appears to be allele-specific, but it is not as effective as the same-site suppressors in restoring sigma(A) structure and function.    Previously, we identified a novel component of Bacillus subtilis spores, called TasA, which possesses antibacterial activity. TasA is made early in spore formation, as cells enter stationary phase, and is secreted into the medium as well as deposited into the spore. Here, we show that tasA expression can occur as cells enter stationary phase even under sporulation-repressing conditions, indicating that TasA is a transition-phase protein. tasA and two upstream genes, yqxM and sipW, likely form an operon, transcription of which is under positive control by the transition-phase regulatory genes spo0A and spo0H and negative control by the transition phase regulatory gene abrB. These results are consistent with the suggestion that yqxM, sipW, and tasA constitute a transition phase operon that could play a protective role in a variety of cellular responses to stress during late-exponential-phase and early-stationary-phase growth in B. subtilis.    During sporulation, the Bacillus subtilis transcription factor sigmaK is activated by regulated proteolytic processing. I have used a system that facilitates the analysis of the contributions of a modified form of the processing enzyme, SpoIVFB-GFP, and the regulatory proteins BofA and SpoIVFA to the conversion of pro-sigmaK to sigmaK. The results show that in the presence of BofA, SpoIVFA levels increase by greater than 20-fold, SpoIVFA is substantially stabilized, and pro-sigmaK processing is inhibited. In addition, enhanced accumulation of the SpoIVFA protein in the absence of BofA (achieved through the use of an ftsH null mutation) substantially inhibits pro-sigmaK processing. These results suggest that during growth, increased accumulation of the SpoIVFA protein inhibits the activity of SpoIVFB-GFP and regulates the activation of sigmaK.    The competence and sporulation factor (CSF) of Bacillus subtilis is an extracellular pentapeptide produced from the product of phrC. CSF has at least three activities: (i) at low concentrations, it stimulates expression of genes activated by the transcription factor ComA; at higher concentrations, it (ii) inhibits expression of those same genes and (iii) stimulates sporulation. Because the activities of CSF are concentration dependent, we measured the amount of extracellular CSF produced by cells. We found that by mid-exponential phase, CSF accumulated to concentrations (1 to 5 nM) that stimulate ComA-dependent gene expression. Upon entry into stationary phase, CSF reached 50 to 100 nM, concentrations that stimulate sporulation and inhibit ComA-dependent gene expression. Transcription of phrC was found to be controlled by two promoters: P1, which precedes rapC, the gene upstream of phrC; and P2, which directs transcription of phrC only. Both RapC and CSF were found to be part of autoregulatory loops that affect transcription from P1, which we show is activated by ComA approximately P. RapC negatively regulates its own expression, presumably due to its ability to inhibit accumulation of ComA approximately P. CSF positively regulates its own expression, presumably due to its ability to inhibit RapC activity. Transcription from P2, which is controlled by the alternate sigma factor sigma(H), increased as cells entered stationary phase, contributing to the increase in extracellular CSF at this time. In addition to controlling transcription of phrC, sigmaH appears to control expression of at least one other gene required for production of CSF.    The yfhP, yfhQ (mutY homologue), yfhS and yfhR (oxidoreductase homologue) genes, which are located upstream of the sspE locus, have been identified in the Bacillus subtilis genome. Transcriptional analysis showed that yfhP, yfhQ and yfhR are transcribed during the exponential growth phase, and sspE is monocistronically transcribed in the late sporulation phase and co-transcribed with yfhQ and/or yfhR during exponential growth. However, SspE was not translated during this period. Northern blot and primer extension analyses indicated that yfhS is transcribed by E sigma E during sporulation. No significant difference between wild-type and yfhS mutant strains was found in the rate of sporulation or germination, the heat tolerance of spores or the transcription of the sspE locus during sporulation. The transcription of the yfhP and yfhQ-yfhR-sspE loci increased 2.5- and 5.3-fold in a yfhP-deficient strain compared to the wild-type strain at t-2 (2 h before initiation of sporulation). In addition, transcription corresponding to the yfhR-sspE loci increased more than twofold with maximum values observed at t-1.5. These results suggest that YfhP may act as a negative regulator for the transcription of yfhQ, yfhR, sspE and yfhP.    The natural resistance associated macrophage protein 1 (Nramp1) gene determines the ability of murine macrophages to control infection with a group of intracellular pathogens, including Salmonella typhimurium, Leishmania donovani, and Mycobacterium bovis bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG). The expression of the resistant allele of the Nramp1 gene in murine macrophages is associated with a more efficient expression of several macrophage activation-associated genes, including class II MHC loci. In this study, we investigated the molecular mechanisms involved in IFN-gamma-induced MHC class II expression in three types of macrophages: those expressing a wild-type allele of the Nramp1 gene (B10R and 129/Mphi), those carrying a susceptible form of the Nramp1 gene (B10S), and those derived from 129-Nramp1-knockout mice (129/Nramp1-KO). Previously, we published results showing that Ia protein expression is significantly higher in the IFN-gamma-induced B10R macrophages, compared with its susceptible counterpart. In this paper, we also show that the higher expression of Ia protein in B10R cells is associated with higher I-Abeta mRNA expression, which correlates with a higher level of IFN-gamma-induced phosphorylation of the STAT1-alpha protein and subsequently with elevated expression of class II transactivator (CIITA) mRNA, compared with B10S. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the infection of macrophages with M. bovis BCG results in a down-regulation of CIITA mRNA expression and, consequently, in the inhibition of Ia induction. Therefore, our data explain, at least in part, the molecular mechanism involved in the inhibition of I-Abeta gene expression in M. bovis BCG-infected macrophages activated with IFN-gamma.    We compared in vitro transcription-initiated folding of the ribozyme from Bacillus subtilis RNase P to refolding from the full-length, denatured state by monitoring the appearance of its catalytic activity. At 37 degrees C, Mg(2+)-initiated refolding of the wild type and a circularly permutate ribozyme takes minutes and is limited by a kinetic trap. Transcription by T7 RNA polymerase alters the folding pathway of both RNAs and introduces new kinetic traps. Transcription by the core Escherichia coli RNA polymerase yields the same result, in spite of its 4-fold-slower elongation rate. However, the presence of its elongation factor NusA accelerates more than 10-fold the transcription-initiated folding of the circularly, permutated ribozyme by E. coli RNA polymerase. The effect of NusA likely is caused by its enhancement of transcriptional pausing because NusA did not accelerate transcription-initiated folding using a mutant RNA polymerase that failed to pause or respond to NusA during ribozyme synthesis. We conclude that both transcription and specific pausing therein can alter RNA-folding pathways.    ComK is a transcription factor required for the expression of competence genes in Bacillus subtilis. Binding to MecA targets ComK for degradation by the ClpCP protease. MecA therefore acts as an adapter protein recruiting a regulatory protein for proteolysis. However, when ComS is synthesized, ComK is released from binding by MecA and thereby protected from degradation. MecA binds to three protein partners during these processes: ComK, ClpC and ComS. Using limited proteolysis, we have defined N- and C-terminal structural domains of MecA and evaluated the interactions of these domains with the protein partners of MecA. Using surface plasmon resonance, we have determined that the N-terminal domain of MecA interacts with ComK and ComS and the C-terminal domain with ClpC. MecA is shown to exist as a dimer with dimerization sites on both the N- and C-terminal domains. The C-terminal domain stimulates the ATPase activity of ClpC and is degraded by the ClpCP protease, while the N-terminal domain is inactive in both of these assays. In vivo data were consistent with these findings, as comG-lacZ expression was decreased in a strain overproducing the N-terminal domain, indicating reduced ComK activity. We propose a model in which binding of ClpC to the C-terminal domain of MecA induces a conformational change enabling the N-terminal domain to bind ComK with enhanced affinity. MecA is widespread among Gram-positive organisms and may act generally as an adapter protein, targeting proteins for regulated degradation.    A 37-kb DNA fragment containing five fengycin synthetase genes, including fenC, fenD, fenE, fenA, and fenB, was cloned and sequenced. Among these genes, fenC encodes a fengycin synthetase 2,560 amino acids long with an estimated molecular mass of 287 kDa. This protein contains two amino acid activation modules, FenC1 and FenC2, which activate L-glutamic acid and L-ornithine, respectively. Primer extension, using mRNA isolated from the log-phase cells, identified a transcription start site located 86 nucleotides upstream from the initiation codon of fenC, implying that a promoter is located upstream from the start site. Primer extension using total RNA isolated from stationary-phase cells also identified a transcription start site located 61 nucleotides upstream from the initiation codon of fenC. Gene fusion studies demonstrated that in nHA medium, the cells transcribe the fengycin synthetase genes at two different stages of cell growth. The promoter is active during the log phase, and the activity reaches the highest level during the late log phase. The activity decreases sharply but is maintained at a low level for approximately 24 h after cells enter the early stationary phase. The results of this investigation also suggest that the transcription of fenC is positively regulated during the late log phase. Results presented herein provide further insight into fengycin synthesis by B. subtilis F29-3.    As Bacillus subtilis proceeds through sporulation, the principal vegetative cell sigma subunit (sigma(A)) persists in the cell but is replaced in the extractable RNA polymerase (RNAP) by sporulation-specific sigma factors. To explore how this holoenzyme changeover might occur, velocity centrifugation techniques were used in conjunction with Western blot analyses to monitor the associations of RNAP with sigma(A) and two mother cell sigma factors, sigma(E) and sigma(K), which successively replace sigma(A) on RNAP. Although the relative abundance of sigma(A) with respect to RNAP remained virtually unchanged during sporulation, the percentage of the detectable sigma(A) which cosedimented with RNAP fell from approximately 50% at the onset of sporulation (T(0)) to 2 to 8% by 3 h into the process (T(3)). In a strain that failed to synthesize sigma(E), the first of the mother cell-specific sigma factors, approximately 40% of the sigma(A) remained associated with RNAP at T(3). The level of sigma(A)-RNAP cosedimentation dropped to less than 10% in a strain which synthesized a sigma(E) variant (sigma(ECR119)) that could bind to RNAP but was unable to direct sigma(E)-dependent transcription. The E-sigma(E)-to-E-sigma(K) changeover was characterized by both the displacement of sigma(E) from RNAP and the disappearance of sigma(E) from the cell. Analyses of extracts from wild-type and mutant B. subtilis showed that the sigma(K) protein is required for the displacement of sigma(E) from RNAP and also confirmed that sigma(K) is needed for the loss of the sigma(E) protein. The results indicate that the successive appearance of mother cell sigma factors, but not necessarily their activities, is an important element in the displacement of preexisting sigma factors from RNAP. It suggests that competition for RNAP by consecutive sporulation sigma factors may be an important feature of the holoenzyme changeovers that occur during sporulation.    By transposon Tn917 mutagenesis, two mutants of Staphylococcus xylosus were isolated that showed higher levels of beta-galactosidase activity in the presence of glucose than the wild type. Both transposons integrated in a gene, designated glcU, encoding a protein involved in glucose uptake in S. xylosus, which is followed by a glucose dehydrogenase gene (gdh). Glucose-mediated repression of beta-galactosidase, alpha-glucosidase, and beta-glucuronidase activities was partially relieved in the mutant strains, while repression by sucrose or fructose remained as strong as in the wild type. In addition to the pleiotropic regulatory effect, integration of the transposons into glcU reduced glucose dehydrogenase activity, suggesting cotranscription of glcU and gdh. Insertional inactivation of the gdh gene and deletion of the glcU gene without affecting gdh expression showed that loss of GlcU function is exclusively responsible for the regulatory defect. Reduced glucose repression is most likely the consequence of impaired glucose uptake in the glcU mutant strains. With cloned glcU, an Escherichia coli mutant deficient in glucose transport could grow with glucose as sole carbon source, provided a functional glucose kinase was present. Therefore, glucose is internalized by glcU in nonphosphorylated form. A gene from Bacillus subtilis, ycxE, that is homologous to glcU, could substitute for glcU in the E. coli glucose growth experiments and restored glucose repression in the S. xylosus glcU mutants. Three more proteins with high levels of similarity to GlcU and YcxE are currently in the databases. It appears that these proteins constitute a novel family whose members are involved in bacterial transport processes. GlcU and YcxE are the first examples whose specificity, glucose, has been determined.    The transcription program of the Bacillus phage GA-1, a distant relative of phage Phi29, has been studied. Transcription of the GA-1 genome occurred in two stages, early and late. Early genes were expressed from two promoters equivalent to the Phi29 A2b and A2c promoters, whereas late transcription started at a site equivalent to the Phi29 late A3 promoter. The activity of the GA-1 early A2b and A2c promoters diminished 10 minutes after infection, a time at which expression of the late promoter increased significantly. The switch from early to late transcription required protein synthesis, suggesting the need for viral protein(s). An open reading frame was found in the GA-1 genome coding for a protein showing a 53 % similarity to Phi29 regulatory protein p4, and was named p4G. In Phi29, protein p4 represses the early A2b and A2c promoters and activates the late A3 promoter by recruiting RNA polymerase to it. A binding site for protein p4Gwas localized upstream from the GA-1 late A3 promoter, overlapping with the early A2b promoter. In vitro, protein p4Gprevented the binding of RNA polymerase to the GA-1 early A2b promoter but, unlike in Phi29, had no effect on the expression of the late A3 promoter: RNA polymerase could efficiently bind and initiate transcription from the A3 promoter in the absence of protein p4G. Therefore, activation of late transcription occurs differently in GA-1 and Phi29. We propose that protein p4Gis an anti-repressor which inhibits the binding to the late promoter of an unknown repressor factor present in the host strain. Copyright 1999 Academic Press.    PhoR of Bacillus subtilis is a histidine sensor-kinase belonging to the family of two-component signal transduction systems. PhoR is responsible for processing the phosphate-starvation signal and providing phosphate input to regulate the level of phosphorylated response regulator, PhoP, which activates/represses Pho regulon gene transcription. The catalytic domain of PhoR is sufficient for the low-phosphate inducible expression of Pho regulon genes since removing the N-terminal membrane-associated domain did not alter the kinetics of Pho induction, albeit the total level of induction was decreased (1). In this study we showed that the complete B. subtilis PhoR protein produced in Escherichia coli can be reverse phosphorylated by PhoP-phosphate. We also used a C-terminal fragment of the PhoR protein, PhoR, to demonstrate that the phosphoryl group on phospho-PhoP was transferred back to PhoR in the reverse phosphorylation reaction or released as inorganic phosphate to the reaction mixture. The reverse phosphorylation of the PhoR protein likely occurs at the same histidine residue (His360) that is utilized for the autokinase reaction by the same protein. In the presence of ADP, the phosphoryl group is further transferred to ADP to form ATP. While the autokinase reaction, the forward phosphotransfer reaction from PhoR approximately P to PhoP, and the release of inorganic phosphate from PhoP approximately P in the presence of PhoR require Mg(2+), the reverse phosphotransfer from PhoP approximately P to PhoR does not. These results indicate that the energy levels of the phosphoryl groups on PhoP and PhoR are very similar. The reversible autokinase reaction and/or the reversible phosphotransfer reaction between PhoR approximately P and PhoP may have a role in PhoP approximately P decay thus influencing the PhoP approximately P concentration in the cell.    The enzyme, phosphotransacetylase (Pta), catalyzes the conversion of acetyl coenzyme A to acetyl phosphate. The putative pta gene of Bacillus subtilis, which had been sequenced as part of the Genome Project, was cloned and overexpressed in Escherichia coli. We confirmed that the gene encodes Pta by measuring the enzymatic activity of the purified protein. Insertional mutagenesis of the pta gene resulted in complete loss of the Pta activity, indicating that B. subtilis contains only one kind of pta gene. Expression of a pta-lacZ fusion was induced in the presence of excess glucose in the growth medium, and the intact ccpA gene was required for this activation. The transcriptional start site of the pta gene was located at 37 nucleotides upstream of the pta start codon, and a cre (catabolite responsive element) sequence, a cis-acting element that is responsible for the catabolite repression of a number of carbon utilization genes in B. subtilis, was identified upstream of the tentative promoter site. Experiments involving oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis showed that the cre sequence is involved in glucose-mediated transcriptional activation.    sigma(B), the general stress response sigma factor of Bacillus subtilis, is activated when intracellular ATP levels fall or the bacterium experiences environmental stress. Stress activates sigma(B) by means of a collection of regulatory kinases and phosphatases (the Rsb proteins), which catalyze the release of sigma(B) from an anti-sigma factor inhibitor. By using the yeast dihybrid selection system to identify B. subtilis proteins that could interact with Rsb proteins and act as mediators of stress signaling, we isolated the GTP binding protein, Obg, as an interactor with several of these regulators (RsbT, RsbW, and RsbX). B. subtilis depleted of Obg no longer activated sigma(B) in response to environmental stress, but it retained the ability to activate sigma(B) by the ATP responsive pathway. Stress pathway components activated sigma(B) in the absence of Obg if the pathway&apos;s most upstream effector (RsbT) was synthesized in excess to the inhibitor (RsbS) from which it is normally released after stress. Thus, the Rsb proteins can function in the absence of Obg but fail to be triggered by stress. The data demonstrate that Obg, or a process under its control, is necessary to induce the stress-dependent activation of sigma(B) and suggest that Obg may directly communicate with one or more sigma(B) regulators.    The expression of 21 novel genes located in the region from dnaA to abrB of the Bacillus subtilis chromosome was analyzed. One of the genes, yaaH, had a predicted promoter sequence conserved among SigE-dependent genes. Northern blot analysis revealed that yaaH mRNA was first detected from 2 h after the cessation of logarithmic growth (T(2)) of sporulation in wild-type cells and in spoIIIG (SigG(-)) and spoIVCB (SigK(-)) mutants but not in spoIIAC (SigF(-)) and spoIIGAB (SigE(-)) mutants. The transcription start point was determined by primer extension analysis; the -10 and -35 regions are very similar to the consensus sequences recognized by SigE-containing RNA polymerase. A YaaH-His tag fusion encoded by a plasmid with a predicted promoter for the yaaH gene was produced from T(2) of sporulation in a B. subtilis transformant and extracted from mature spores, indicating that the yaaH gene product is a spore protein. Inactivation of the yaaH gene by insertion of an erythromycin resistance gene did not affect vegetative growth or spore resistance to heat, chloroform, and lysozyme. The germination of yaaH mutant spores in a mixture of L-asparagine, D-glucose, D-fructose, and potassium chloride was almost the same as that of wild-type spores, but the mutant spores were defective in L-alanine-stimulated germination. These results suggest that yaaH is a novel gene encoding a spore protein produced in the mother cell compartment from T(2) of sporulation and that it is required for the L-alanine-stimulated germination pathway.    ComP is a sensor histidine kinase of Bacillus subtilis required for the signal transduction pathway that initiates the development of competence for genetic transformation. It is believed that ComP senses the presence of ComX, a modified extracellular peptide pheromone, and donates a phosphate to ComA, thereby activating this transcription factor for binding to the srfA promoter. In the present study, fusions to the Escherichia coli proteins PhoA and LacZ and analysis of its susceptibility to the protease kallikrein were used to probe the membrane topology of ComP. These data suggest that ComP contains six or eight membrane-spanning segments and two large extracytoplasmic loops in its N-terminal membrane-associated domain. Deletions were introduced involving the large extracellular loops to explore the role of the N-terminal domain of ComP in signal transduction. The absence of the second loop conferred a phenotype in which ComP was active in the absence of ComX. The implications of these data are discussed.    Protective antigen (PA) is an important component of the edema and lethal toxins produced by Bacillus anthracis. PA is essential for binding the toxins to the target cell receptor and for facilitating translocation of the enzymatic toxin components, edema factor and lethal factor, across the target cell membrane. The structural gene for PA, pagA (previously known as pag), is located on the 182-kb virulence plasmid pXO1 at a locus distinct from the edema factor and lethal factor genes. Here we show that a 300-bp gene located downstream of pagA is cotranscribed with pagA and represses expression of the operon. We have designated this gene pagR (for protective antigen repressor). Two pagA mRNA transcripts were detected in cells producing PA: a short, 2.7-kb transcript corresponding to the pagA gene, and a longer, 4.2-kb transcript representing a bicistronic message derived from pagA and pagR. The 3&apos; end of the short transcript mapped adjacent to an inverted repeat sequence, suggesting that the sequence can act as a transcription terminator. Attenuation of termination at this site results in transcription of pagR. A pagR mutant exhibited increased steady-state levels of pagA mRNA, indicating that pagR negatively controls expression of the operon. Autogenous control of the operon may involve atxA, a trans-acting positive regulator of pagA. The steady-state level of atxA mRNA was also increased in the pagR mutant. The mutant phenotype was complemented by addition of pagR in trans on a multicopy plasmid.    Single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) promoters are the key components of the single-strand origins (ssos) of replication of rolling-circle (RC) replicating plasmids. The recognition of this origin by the host RNA polymerase and the synthesis of a short primer RNA are critical for initiation of lagging-strand synthesis. This step is thought to be a limiting factor for the establishment of RC plasmids in a broad range of bacteria, because most of the ssos described are fully active only in their natural hosts. A special type of sso, the ssoU, is unique in the sense that it can be efficiently recognized in a number of different Gram-positive hosts. We have experimentally deduced the folded structure and characterized the ssDNA promoter present within the ssoU using P1 nuclease digestion and DNase I protection assays with the Bacillus subtilis and Staphylococcus aureus RNA polymerases. We have also identified the RNA products synthesized from this ssDNA promoter and mapped the initiation points of lagging-strand synthesis in vivo from ssoU-containing plasmids. Through gel mobility shift experiments, we have found that ssDNA containing the ssoU sequence can efficiently interact with the RNA polymerase from two different Gram-positive bacteria, S. aureus and B. subtilis. We have also realigned the narrow and broad host range sso sequences of RC plasmids, and found that they contain significant homology. Our data support the notion that the strength of the RNA polymerase-ssoU interaction may be the critical factor that confers the ability on the ssoU to be fully functional in a broad range of bacteria.    The RNA polymerase sigma subunit, sigmaH (Spo0H) of Bacillus subtilis, is essential for the transcription of genes that function in sporulation and genetic competence. Although spo0H is transcriptionally regulated by the key regulatory device that controls sporulation initiation, the Spo0 phosphorelay, there is considerable evidence implicating a mechanism of post-translational control that governs the activity and concentration of sigmaH. Post-translational control of spo0H is responsible for the reduced expression of genes requiring sigmaH under conditions of low environmental pH. It is also responsible for heightened sigmaH activity upon relief of acid stress and during nutritional depletion. In this study, the ATP-dependent proteases LonA and B and the regulatory ATPase ClpX were found to function in the post-translational control of sigmaH. Mutations in lonA and lonB result in elevated sigmaH protein concentrations in low-pH cultures. However, this is not sufficient to increase sigmaH-dependent transcription. Activation of sigmaH-dependent transcription upon raising medium pH and in cells undergoing sporulation requires clpX, as shown by measuring the expression of lacZ fusions that require sigmaH for transcription and by complementation of a clpX null mutation. A hypothesis is presented that low environmental pH results in the Lon-dependent degradation of sigmaH, but the activity of sigmaH in sporulating cells and in cultures at neutral pH is stimulated by a ClpX-dependent mechanism in response to nutritional stress.    Five single alanine substitution mutations in the Spo0F response regulator gave rise to mutant strains of Bacillus subtilis with seemingly normal sporulation that nevertheless rapidly segregated variants blocked in sporulation. The basis for this deregulated phenotype was postulated to be increased phosphorylation of the Spo0A transcription factor, resulting from enhanced phosphate input or decreased dephosphorylation of the phosphorelay. Strains bearing two of these Spo0F mutant proteins, Y13A and I17A, retained a requirement for KinA and KinB kinases in sporulation, whereas the remaining three, L66A, I90A and H101A, gave strains that sporulated well in the absence of both KinA and KinB. Sporulation of strains bearing L66A and H101A mutations was decreased in a mutant lacking KinA, KinB and KinC, but the strain bearing the I90A mutation required the further deletion of KinD to lower its sporulation frequency. The affected residues, L-66, I-90 and H-101, are involved in crucial hydrophobic contacts stabilizing the orientation of helix alpha4 of Spo0F. The data are consistent with the notion that these three mutations alter the conformation of the beta4-alpha4 loop of Spo0F that is known to contain residues critical for KinA:Spo0F recognition. As this loop has a propensity for multiple conformations, the spatial arrangement of this loop may play a critical role in kinase selection by Spo0F and might be altered by regulatory molecules interacting with Spo0F.    Bacillus subtilis DB1005 is a temperature-sensitive (Ts) sigA mutant. Induction of sigmaA has been observed exclusively in this mutant harbouring extra copies of the plasmid-borne Ts sigA gene transcriptionally controlled by the P1P2 promoters of the B. subtilis macromolecular synthesis (MMS; rpoD or sigA) operon. Investigation of the mechanisms leading to the induction has allowed us to identify a sigmaB-type promoter, P7, in the MMS operon for the first time. Therefore, at least seven promoters in total are responsible for the regulation of the B. subtilis MMS operon, including the four known sigmaA- and sigmaH-type promoters, as well as two incompletely defined promoters. The P7 promoter was activated in B. subtilis after the imposition of heat, ethanol and salt stresses, indicating that the MMS operon of B. subtilis is subjected to the control of general stress. The significant heat induction of P7 in B. subtilis DB1005 harbouring a plasmid-borne Ts sigA gene can be explained by a model of competition between sigmaA and sigmaB for core binding; very probably, the sigmaB factor binds more efficiently to core RNA polymerase under heat shock. This mechanism may provide a means for the expression of the B. subtilis MMS operon when sigmaA becomes defective in core binding.    The presence of intricate global cell regulation mechanisms may be one reason for the exceptional environmental and evolutionary success of microbes. Promoters, the cis-acting signals, are responsive to several stimuli related to growth, stress and substrate specificity. Their response is mediated by a wide variety of trans-acting regulators that sense the environment and the physiological state of the cell and adjust the transcription of specific genes. One of the main transcriptional regulation webs operates in the transition from affluent to barren conditions, with sigmaS being the chief actor in a company of players that stage a competition for the sparsely available RNA polymerase molecules. In this role, sigmaS may be assisted by several factors, including nucleoid-related proteins and metabolites. In addition, the levels of sigmaS itself are regulated by mechanisms that include inactivation and degradation. Several transcription factors, belonging to different regulatory pathways, may operate in the same promoter. In such a case, the final transcriptional output depends both on the interplay of effectors and on the properties of the recruitment of the effector-RNA polymerase complex to the promoter. RNA polymerase itself is also capable of establishing selective interactions with activators and specific promoter regions through the carboxy-terminal domain of its alpha subunit (alphaCTD). Transcriptional regulation controls pervade such crucial events in the life of bacterial cells as Escherichia coli cell division, Bacillus subtilis sporulation and Caulobacter crescentus differentiation. These examples suggest that bacteria have been particularly inventive in adapting gene expression regulation to survive under a diversity of environments and have done so by exploiting the malleable molecular mechanisms involved in transcription, developing complexities that may match those found in eukaryotic cells.    During endospore formation in Bacillus subtilis, the DNA binding protein GerE stimulates transcription from several promoters that are used by RNA polymerase containing sigmaK. GerE binds to a site on one of these promoters, cotX, that overlaps its -35 region. We tested the model that GerE interacts with sigmaK at the cotX promoter by seeking amino acid substitutions in sigmaK that interfered with GerE-dependent activation of the cotX promoter but which did not affect utilization of the sigmaK-dependent, GerE-independent promoter gerE. We identified two amino acid substitutions in sigmaK, E216K and H225Y, that decrease cotX promoter utilization but do not affect gerE promoter activity. Alanine substitutions at these positions had similar effects. We also examined the effects of the E216A and H225Y substitutions in sigmaK on transcription in vitro. We found that these substitutions specifically reduced utilization of the cotX promoter. These and other results suggest that the amino acid residues at positions 216 and 225 are required for GerE-dependent cotX promoter activity, that the histidine at position 225 of sigmaK may interact with GerE at the cotX promoter, and that this interaction may facilitate the initial binding of sigmaK RNA polymerase to the cotX promoter. We also found that the alanine substitutions at positions 216 and 225 of sigmaK had no effect on utilization of the GerE-dependent promoter cotD, which contains GerE binding sites that do not overlap with its -35 region.    Bacillus subtilis contains three metalloregulatory proteins belonging to the ferric uptake repressor (Fur) family: Fur, Zur, and PerR. We have overproduced and purified Fur protein and analyzed its interaction with the operator region controlling the expression of the dihydroxybenzoate siderophore biosynthesis (dhb) operon. The purified protein binds with high affinity and selectivity to the dhb regulatory region. DNA binding does not require added iron, nor is binding reduced by dialysis of Fur against EDTA or treatment with Chelex. Fur selectively inhibits transcription from the dhb promoter by sigmaA RNA polymerase, even if Fur is added after RNA polymerase holoenzyme. Since neither DNA binding nor inhibition of transcription requires the addition of ferrous ion in vitro, the mechanism by which iron regulates Fur function in vivo is not obvious. Mutagenesis of the fur gene reveals that in vivo repression of the dhb operon by iron requires His97, a residue thought to be involved in iron sensing in other Fur homologs. Moreover, we identify His96 as a second likely iron ligand, since a His96Ala mutant mediates repression at 50 microM but not at 5 microM iron. Our data lead us to suggest that Fur is able to bind DNA independently of bound iron and that the in vivo role of iron is to counteract the effect of an inhibitory factor, perhaps another metal ion, that antagonizes this DNA-binding activity.    Oligopeptides are transported into Bacillus subtilis by two ABC transport systems, App and Opp. Transcription of the operon encoding the Opp system was found to occur during exponential growth, whereas the app operon was induced at the onset of stationary phase. Transcription of both operons was completely curtailed by overproduction of the ScoC regulator from a multicopy plasmid and was enhanced in strains with the scoC locus deleted. ScoC, a member of the MarR family of transcription regulators, is known from previous studies to be a negative regulator of sporulation and of protease production that acts by binding directly to the promoters of the genes it regulates. Since peptide transport is essential for inactivation of the negative regulation of sporulation by Rap phosphatases, the control of ScoC transcription repression activity plays a crucial role in the initiation of sporulation.    Temporal and spatial gene regulation during Bacillus subtilis sporulation involves the activation and inactivation of multiple sigma subunits of RNA polymerase in a cascade. In the mother cell compartment of sporulating cells, expression of the sigE gene, encoding the earlier-acting sigma factor, sigmaE, is negatively regulated by the later-acting sigma factor, sigmaK. Here, it is shown that the negative feedback loop does not require SinR, an inhibitor of sigE transcription. Production of sigmaK about 1 h earlier than normal does affect Spo0A, which when phosphorylated is an activator of sigE transcription. A mutation in the spo0A gene, which bypasses the phosphorelay leading to the phosphorylation of Spo0A, diminished the negative effect of early sigmaK production on sigE expression early in sporulation. Also, early production of sigmaK reduced expression of other Spo0A-dependent genes but not expression of the Spo0A-independent ald gene. In contrast, both sigE and ald were overexpressed late in development of cells that fail to make sigmaK. The ald promoter, like the sigE promoter, is believed to be recognized by sigmaA RNA polymerase, suggesting that sigmaK may inhibit sigmaA activity late in sporulation. To exert this negative effect, sigmaK must be transcriptionally active. A mutant form of sigmaK that associates with core RNA polymerase, but does not direct transcription of a sigmaK-dependent gene, failed to negatively regulate expression of sigE or ald late in development. On the other hand, the negative effect of early sigmaK production on sigE expression early in sporulation did not require transcriptional activity of sigmaK RNA polymerase. These results demonstrate that sigmaK can negatively regulate sigE expression by two different mechanisms, one observed when sigmaK is produced earlier than normal, which does not require sigmaK to be transcriptionally active and affects Spo0A, and the other observed when sigmaK is produced at the normal time, which requires sigmaK RNA polymerase transcriptional activity. The latter mechanism facilitates the switch from sigmaE to sigmaK in the cascade controlling mother cell gene expression.    The heptacistronic dnaK heat shock operon of Bacillus subtilis consists of the genes hrcA, grpE, dnaK, dnaJ, orf35, orf28 and orf50. It is controlled by the CIRCE/HrcA operator/repressor system and specifies three primary transcripts, two of which are processed into three different products. We have analysed the regulatory consequences of this complex transcriptional organization in detail. First, the seven genes were heat induced to different extents at the mRNA level and can be classified into three groups by their induction factors. This differential induction was also reflected at the protein level. Secondly, the cellular amounts of the proteins HrcA, DnaK and DnaJ in B. subtilis differed drastically both under non-heat shock conditions and after thermal upshock. Thirdly, Northern blot analyses demonstrated that an mRNA-processing reaction generating products of differential stabilities plays an essential role during the regulation of gene expression. A crucial factor determining the low stability of two transcripts is the presence of the CIRCE element at their 5&apos; ends. We demonstrate that CIRCE leads to the destabilization of mRNAs, but only if it is located in the immediate vicinity of a Shine-Dalgarno sequence. These results show that B. subtilis is using various, especially post-transcriptional, regulatory mechanisms to fine tune the expression of the individual genes of the heptacistronic dnaK operon.    Cell cycle events have been proposed to be triggered by the formation of membrane domains in the process of coupled transcription, translation and insertion (&apos;transertion&apos;) of nascent membrane and exported proteins. Disruption of domain structure should lead to changes in membrane dynamics. Membrane viscosity of Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis decreased after inhibition of protein synthesis by chloramphenicol or puromycin, or of RNA initiation by rifampicin, but not after inhibition of RNA elongation by streptolydigin or amino acid starvation of a stringent strain. The decrease caused by inhibitors of protein synthesis was prevented by streptolydigin if added simultaneously, but was not reversed if added later. The drug-induced decrease in membrane viscosity is energy dependent: it did not happen in KCN-treated cells. All treatments decreasing membrane viscosity also induced nucleoid compaction and fusion. Inhibition of macromolecular synthesis without membrane perturbation caused nucleoids to expand. Changes in membrane dynamics were also displayed during a nutritional shift-down transition that causes imbalance in macromolecular syntheses. The results are consistent with the transertion model, predicting dissipation of membrane domains by termination of protein synthesis or detachment of polysomes from DNA; domain structure is conserved if the transertion process is &apos;frozen&apos;.    PURPOSE: We analyze the relationship among p53 mutations, p21 and Bax activation as well as their clinical implication in clinical response to intravesical bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) therapy in high grade bladder tumors. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analyzed a prospective series of 60 superficial bladder tumors using functional assays in yeast which test the transcriptional competence of p53 and can be used to identify p21 and Bax status. BCG instillations were given after initial tumor resection to 26 patients with a high risk of bladder invasive disease (pT1G3 tumors in 24 and carcinoma in situ in 2). RESULTS: No p53 alteration was detected in cases of pTa tumors. In contrast, p53 mutations were detected in 16 of 24 patients (66%) with pT1 G3 tumors and in 2 with primary carcinoma in situ. These 18 mutant samples scored also mutant for transactivation of p21 and Bax reporter strain. In 26 bladder tumors treated with BCG instillations there was a statistical difference (p = 0.0075) in the response to BCG therapy between 18 tumors with and 8 without alterations using functional assays in yeast. CONCLUSIONS: The p53 mutations, using functional assay in yeast, inactivate the transcription of p21 and Bax genes, and based on these preliminary results could have a useful predictive value for BCG therapy response in bladder cancer.    The general stress response of Bacillus subtilis is triggered by a variety of environmental and metabolic stresses which activate the sigmaB transcription factor. Among the more than 100 genes controlled by sigmaB (the csb genes), the functions identified thus far include resistance to oxidative stress, resistance to protein denaturation and resistance to osmotic stress. To understand the breadth of functions in which csb genes participate, the transcriptional organization and predicted products of two such genes previously identified in a screen for sigmaB-dependent lacZ fusions were analysed. The csb-22::Tn917lacZ and csb-34::Tn917lacZ fusions are unusual among csb genes in that their expression appears to be completely dependent upon sigmaB. By plasmid-integration experiments, fusion analyses and site-directed mutagenesis, stress-inducible, sigmaB-dependent promoters for both these fusions were identified. The csb-34 fusion marked an ORF (yxcC or csbC) which by sequence analysis lay in a monocistronic transcriptional unit. This ORF encoded a predicted 461-residue product which had high identity with Class I sugar transporters of the major facilitator superfamily. It was speculated that the csbC product could serve either a nutritional or an osmotic protection function. In contrast, the csb-22 fusion identified an ORF (ywmG or csbD) which appeared to be the second gene of a two-gene operon. This ORF encoded a predicted 62-residue product which resembled a small Escherichia coli protein of unknown function. The sigmaB. dependent promoter lay immediately upstream from csbD and appeared to be an internal promoter for the operon.    Characterization of both the cis and trans -acting regulatory elements indicates that the Bacillus stearothermophilustrp operon is regulated by an attenuation mechanism similar to that which controls the trp operon in Bacillus subtilis. Secondary structure predictions indicate that the leader region of the trp mRNA is capable of folding into terminator and anti- terminator RNA structures. B. stearothermophilus also encodes an RNA-binding protein with 77% sequence identity with the RNA-binding protein (TRAP) that regulates attenuation in B. subtilis. The X-ray structure of this protein has been determined in complex with L-tryptophan at 2.5 A resolution. Like the B. subtilis protein, B. stearothermophilus TRAP has 11 subunits arranged in a ring-like structure. The central cavities in these two structures have different sizes and opposite charge distributions, and packing within the B. stearothermophilus TRAP crystal form does not generate the head-to-head dimers seen in the B. subtilis protein, suggesting that neither of these properties is functionally important. However, the mode of L-tryptophan binding and the proposed RNA binding surfaces are similar, indicating that both proteins are activated by l -tryptophan and bind RNA in essentially the same way. As expected, the TRAP:RNA complex from B. stearothermophilus is significantly more thermostable than that from B. subtilis, with optimal binding occurring at 70 degrees C. Copyright 1999 Academic Press.    The major transcription factors controlling arginine metabolism in Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis, ArgR and AhrC, respectively, are homologous multimeric proteins that form l -arginine-dependent DNA-binding complexes capable of repressing transcription of the biosynthetic genes (both), activating transcription of catabolic genes (AhrC only) or facilitating plasmid dimer resolution (both). Multimerisation and l -arginine binding are associated with the C-terminal 70-80 residues; the N-terminal regions contain a winged helix-turn-helix DNA-binding domain. We have constructed chimeric genes in which the sequences for the N and C-terminal domains have been swapped. The resultant chimeric proteins and their corresponding native proteins have been analysed for their ability to multimerise and bind DNA operator sites in an L-arginine-dependent fashion.Gel filtration and equilibrium sedimentation analysis are consistent with the formation of hexamers by all four proteins in the presence of L-arginine and at high protein concentrations (&gt;100 nM monomer). The hexamer sedimentation coefficients suggest that there is a reduction in molecular volume upon binding L-arginine, consistent with a conformational change accompanying an allosteric activation of DNA-binding. In the absence of L-arginine or at lower protein concentrations, the hexamers are clearly in rapid equilibrium with smaller subunits, whose dominant species appear to be based on trimers, as expected from the crystal structure of the ArgR C-terminal fragment, with the exception of the ArgR-C chimera, which apparently dissociates into dimers, suggesting that in the intact protein the DNA-binding domains may have a significant dimeric interaction. The hexamer-trimer Kdis in the micromolar range, suggesting that trimers are the principal species at in vivo concentrations.DNA binding by all four proteins has been probed by gel retardation and DNase I footprinting analysis using all three types of naturally occurring operators: biosynthetic sites encompassing two 18 bp ARG boxes separated by 2 bp; biosynthetic sites containing two such boxes and a third 18 bp ARG box at a distance of 100 bp downstream, i.e. within the structural gene; and finally a catabolic operator which contains a single ARG box site. The data show that all four proteins bind to the operators at the expected regions in an L-arginine-dependent fashion. From the apparent affinities of the chimeras for each target site, there is no obvious sequence-specificity associated with the N-terminal domains; rather the data can be interpreted in terms of differential allosteric activation, including DNA binding in the absence of L-arginine.Remarkably, the proteins show apparent &quot;anti-competition&quot; in the presence of excess, specific DNA fragments in gel retardation. This appears to be due to assembly of an activated form of the protein, probably hexamers, on the operator DNA. The data are discussed in terms of the current models for the mode of action of both native proteins. Copyright 1999 Academic Press.    SpoIIAA, a phosphorylatable protein, is essential to the regulation of sigmaF, the first sporulation-specific transcription factor of Bacillus subtilis. The solution structure of SpoIIAA has recently been published. Here we examine four mutant SpoIIAA proteins and correlate their properties with the phenotypes of the corresponding B. subtilis mutant strains. Two of the mutations severely disrupted the structure of the protein, a third greatly diminished the rate of its phosphorylation and abolished dephosphorylation, and the fourth left phosphorylation unaffected but reduced the rate of dephosphorylation about 10-fold.    Regulation of the purine biosynthetic gene purA was examined by using a transcriptional fusion to a luciferase reporter gene. Transcription was repressed about 10-fold by the addition of adenine and increased approximately 4.5-fold by the addition of guanosine. This regulation is mediated by a purine repressor (PurR). In a purR mutant, basal expression was increased 10-fold, and there was no further stimulation by guanosine or repression by adenine. An open reading frame, yabJ, immediately downstream from purR was found to have a role in the repression of purA by adenine. Repression by adenine was perturbed in a purR+ yabJ mutant, although guanosine regulation was retained. Mutations in the PurR PRPP binding motif abolished guanosine regulation in the yabJ mutant. Thus, PRPP appears to be required for upregulation by guanosine. The amino acid sequence of YabJ is homologous to the YER057c/YjgF protein family of unknown function.    A lambda-EMBL3 genomic library of Bacillus stearothermophilus T-6 was screened for hemicellulolytic activities, and five independent clones exhibiting beta-xylosidase activity were isolated. The clones overlap each other and together represent a 23.5-kb chromosomal segment. The segment contains a cluster of xylan utilization genes, which are organized in at least three transcriptional units. These include the gene for the extracellular xylanase, xylanase T-6; part of an operon coding for an intracellular xylanase and a beta-xylosidase; and a putative 15.5-kb-long transcriptional unit, consisting of 12 genes involved in the utilization of alpha-D-glucuronic acid (GlcUA). The first four genes in the potential GlcUA operon (orf1, -2, -3, and -4) code for a putative sugar transport system with characteristic components of the binding-protein-dependent transport systems. The most likely natural substrate for this transport system is aldotetraouronic acid [2-O-alpha-(4-O-methyl-alpha-D-glucuronosyl)-xylotriose] (MeGlcUAXyl3). The following two genes code for an intracellular alpha-glucuronidase (aguA) and a beta-xylosidase (xynB). Five more genes (kdgK, kdgA, uxaC, uxuA, and uxuB) encode proteins that are homologous to enzymes involved in galacturonate and glucuronate catabolism. The gene cluster also includes a potential regulatory gene, uxuR, the product of which resembles repressors of the GntR family. The apparent transcriptional start point of the cluster was determined by primer extension analysis and is located 349 bp from the initial ATG codon. The potential operator site is a perfect 12-bp inverted repeat located downstream from the promoter between nucleotides +170 and +181. Gel retardation assays indicated that UxuR binds specifically to this sequence and that this binding is efficiently prevented in vitro by MeGlcUAXyl3, the most likely molecular inducer.    A search for homologs of the Bacillus subtilis PhoP response regulator in the group A streptococcus (GAS) genome revealed three good candidates. Inactivation of one of these, recently identified as csrR (J. C. Levin and M. R. Wessels, Mol. Microbiol. 30:209-219, 1998), caused the strain to produce mucoid colonies and to increase transcription of hasA, the first gene in the operon for capsule synthesis. We report here that a nonpolar insertion in this gene also increased transcription of ska (encoding streptokinase), sagA (streptolysin S), and speMF (mitogenic factor) but did not affect transcription of slo (streptolysin O), mga (multiple gene regulator of GAS), emm (M protein), scpA (complement C5a peptidase), or speB or speC (pyrogenic exotoxins B and C). The amounts of streptokinase, streptolysin S, and capsule paralleled the levels of transcription of their genes in all cases. Because CsrR represses genes unrelated to those for capsule synthesis, and because CsrA-CsrB is a global regulatory system in Escherichia coli whose mechanism is unrelated to that of these genes in GAS, the locus has been renamed covR, for &quot;control of virulence genes&quot; in GAS. Transcription of the covR operon was also increased in the nonpolar insertion mutant, indicating that CovR represses its own synthesis as well. All phenotypes of the covR nonpolar insertion mutant were complemented by the covR gene on a plasmid. CovR acts on operons expressed both in exponential and in stationary phase, demonstrating that the CovR-CovS pathway is separate from growth phase-dependent regulation in GAS. Therefore, CovR is the first multiple-gene repressor of virulence factors described for this important human pathogen.    Bacterial endospores are encased in a complex protein coat, which confers protection against noxious chemicals and influences the germination response. In Bacillus subtilis, over 20 polypeptides are organized into an amorphous undercoat, a lamellar lightly staining inner structure, and an electron-dense outer coat. Here we report on the identification of a polypeptide of about 30 kDa required for proper coat assembly, which was extracted from spores of a gerE mutant. The N-terminal sequence of this polypeptide matched the deduced product of the tasA gene, after removal of a putative 27-residue signal peptide, and TasA was immunologically detected in material extracted from purified spores. Remarkably, deletion of tasA results in the production of asymmetric spores that accumulate misassembled material in one pole and have a greatly expanded undercoat and an altered outer coat structure. Moreover, we found that tasA and gerE mutations act synergistically to decrease the efficiency of spore germination. We show that tasA is the most distal member of a three-gene operon, which also encodes the type I signal peptidase SipW. Expression of the tasA operon is enhanced 2 h after the onset of sporulation, under the control of sigmaH. When tasA transcription is uncoupled from sipW expression, a presumptive TasA precursor accumulates, suggesting that its maturation depends on SipW. Mature TasA is found in supernatants of sporulating cultures and intracellularly from 2 h of sporulation onward. We suggest that, at an early stage of sporulation, TasA is secreted to the septal compartment. Later, after engulfment of the prespore by the mother cell, TasA acts from the septal-proximal pole of the spore membranes to nucleate the organization of the undercoat region. TasA is the first example of a polypeptide involved in coat assembly whose production is not mother cell specific but rather precedes its formation. Our results implicate secretion as a mechanism to target individual proteins to specific cellular locations during the assembly of the bacterial endospore coat.    Members of the Bacillus cereus group (B. anthracis, B. cereus, B. mycoides and B. thuringiensis) are well-known pathogens of mammals (B. anthracis and B. cereus) and insects (B. thuringiensis). The specific diseases they cause depend on their capacity to produce specific virulence factors, such as the lethal toxin of B. anthracis and the Cry toxins of B. thuringiensis. However, these Bacillus spp. also produce a variety of proteins, such as phospholipases C, which are known to act as virulence factors in various pathogenic bacteria. Few genes encoding these virulence factors have been characterized in pathogenic Bacillus spp. and little is known about the regulation of their expression. We had previously reported that in B. thuringiensis expression of the phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C gene is regulated by the transcriptional activator PlcR. Here we report the identification of several extracellular virulence factor genes by the virtue of their PlcR-regulated expression. These PlcR-regulated genes encode degradative enzymes, cell-surface proteins and enterotoxins. The PlcR-regulated genes are widely dispersed on the chromosome and therefore do not constitute a pathogenic island. Analysis of the promoter region of the PlcR-regulated genes revealed the presence of a highly conserved palindromic region (TATGNAN4TNCATA), which is presumably the specific recognition target for PlcR activation. We found that the plcR gene is also present in and probably restricted to all the members of the B. cereus group. However, although the polypeptide encoded by the B. cereus PlcR gene is functionally equivalent to the B. thuringiensis regulator, the polypeptide encoded by the B. anthracis gene is truncated and not active as a transcriptional activator. PlcR is the first example described of a pleiotropic regulator involved in the control of extracellular virulence factor expression in pathogenic Bacillus spp. These results have implications for the taxonomic relationships among members of the B. cereus group, the virulence properties of these bacteria and the safety of B. thuringiensis-based biopesticides.    The development of Bacillus subtilis genetic competence is a highly regulated adaptive response to stationary-phase stress. A key step in competence development is the activation of the transcriptional regulator ComK, which is required for the expression of genes encoding the products that function in DNA uptake. In log-phase cultures, ComK is trapped in a complex composed of MecA and ClpC, in which it is rendered inactive. The comS gene, contained within the srf operon, is induced in response to high culture cell density and nutritional stress. Its product functions to release active ComK from the complex, allowing ComK to stimulate the transcription initiation of its own gene as well as that of the late competence operons. Western analysis showed that ComS accumulates to maximal levels between T3 and T4, mirroring the pattern of competence cell development and late competence gene expression. Experiments to examine the target of ComS activity in vitro showed that ComS binds to MecA. This is further supported by coimmunoprecipitation using anti-MecA antiserum. To clarify the role of ComS in competence regulation, a system for evaluating the effect of comS and mutant derivatives on the expression of comG, one of the late competence operons, was constructed. comS mutations, created by alanine-scanning mutagenesis, that significantly reduced comG-lacZ expression were clustered within two regions, one at the N-terminus and the other at the C-terminus of ComS. ComSI13 --&gt; A and ComSW43 --&gt; A were selected for further analysis as representative mutants for both regions required for ComS activity. We observed that ComSI13 --&gt; A showed significantly reduced affinity for MecA, whereas ComSW43 --&gt; A showed near normal binding affinity for MecA. The results show that binding to MecA is critical for ComS function, but do not rule out the possibility that ComS possesses other activities.    We found that Congo red agar allows identification of sporulation-deficient Bacillus anthracis. Using Congo red agar, we isolated an asporogenic derivative of the protective antigen-producing strain B. anthracis delta Sterne-1(pPA102). Polymerase chain reaction and Southern hybridization analyses of DNA from the asporogenic mutant revealed that a deletion was present in spoOA, an essential gene for the initiation of sporulation. The deletion also encompassed the spoIVB homologue and a portion of the recN homologue. The avirulent spoOA strain delta Sterne-1(pPA102)CR4 is suitable for the safe production of protective antigen without endospore contamination of the vaccine production facility.    A Bacillus subtilis mutant with a deletion in the citC gene, encoding isocitrate dehydrogenase, the third enzyme of the tricarboxylic acid branch of the Krebs cycle, exhibited reduced growth yield in broth medium and had greatly reduced ability to sporulate compared to the wild type due to a block at stage I, i.e., a failure to form the polar division septum. In early stationary phase, mutant cells accumulated intracellular and extracellular concentrations of citrate and isocitrate that were at least 15-fold higher than in wild-type cells. The growth and sporulation defects of the mutant could be partially bypassed by deletion of the major citrate synthase gene (citZ), by raising the pH of the medium, or by supplementation of the medium with certain divalent cations, suggesting that abnormal accumulation of citrate affects survival of stationary-phase cells and sporulation by lowering extracellular pH and chelating metal ions. While these genetic and environmental alterations were not sufficient to allow the majority of the mutant cell population to pass the stage I block (lack of asymmetric septum formation), introduction of the sof-1 mutant form of the Spo0A transcription factor, when coupled with a reduction in citrate synthesis, restored sporulation gene expression and spore formation nearly to wild-type levels. Thus, the primary factor inhibiting sporulation in a citC mutant is abnormally high accumulation of citrate, but relief of this metabolic defect is not by itself sufficient to restore competence for sporulation.    pGR71, a composite of plasmids pUB110 and pBR322, replicates in Escherichia coli and in Bacillus subtilis. It carries the chloramphenicol resistance gene (cat) from Tn9, which is not transcribed in either host by lack of a promoter. The cat gene is preceded by a Shine-Dalgarno sequence functional in E. coli but not in B. subtilis. Deleted pGR71 plasmids were obtained in B. subtilis when cloning foreign viral DNA upstream of this cat sequence, as well as by BAL31 exonuclease deletions extending upstream from the cat into the pUB110 moiety. These mutant plasmids expressed chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT), conferring on B. subtilis resistance to high chloramphenicol concentrations. CAT expression peaked at the early postexponential phas of B. subtilis growth. The transcription initiation site of cat, determined by primer extension, was located downstream of a putative promoter sequence within the pUB110 moiety. N-terminal amino acid sequencing showed that native CAT was produced by these mutant plasmids. The cat ribosome-binding site, functional in E. coli, was repositioned within the pUB110 moiety and had consequently an extended homology with B. subtilis 16S rRNA, explaining the production of native enzyme.    Expression of the PrfA-controlled virulence gene hly (encoding the pore-forming cytolysin listeriolysin) is down-regulated by readily metabolized carbon sources in Listeria monocytogenes. We isolated a Tn917-insertional mutant of L. monocytogenes (strain LO28), which expressed a hemolytic phenotype in the presence of cellobiose. Using hly fusions to luxAluxB genes, we show that hly expression was derepressed in the presence of cellobiose at the transcriptional level. Surprisingly, hly expression was still repressed by glucose, as observed for the parental strain. Genetic analysis of the Tn917-flanking regions indicated that the transposon had inserted in a non-coding region located between two genes in opposite orientations. These two newly identified genes were designated orfA and mdrL. The insertion occurred immediately upstream of orfA, likely into its promoter region. Transcriptional analysis of orfA and mdrL revealed that Tn917 had abolished orfA expression whereas it had activated expression of mdrL. orfA encodes a putative protein of 176 amino acids homologous to YfiO of Bacillus subtilis (28% identity), a protein of unknown function. mdrL codes for a putative protein of 398 amino acids homologous to Bmr and Blt of B. subtilis (21-24% identity), two members of the multidrug resistance efflux pump family. Our results indicate that we have identified a new locus which plays a crucial role in the cellobiose-dependent repression of hly expression.    The delta protein is a dispensable subunit of Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase (RNAP) that has major effects on the biochemical properties of the purified enzyme. In the presence of delta, RNAP displays an increased specificity of transcription, a decreased affinity for nucleic acids, and an increased efficiency of RNA synthesis because of enhanced recycling. Despite these profound effects, a strain containing a deletion of the delta gene (rpoE) is viable and shows no major alterations in gene expression. Quantitative immunoblotting experiments demonstrate that delta is present in molar excess relative to RNAP in both vegetative cells and spores. Expression of rpoE initiates from a single, sigmaA-dependent promoter and is maximal in transition phase. A rpoE mutant strain has an altered morphology and is delayed in the exit from stationary phase. For biochemical analyses we have created derivatives of delta and sigmaA that can be radiolabeled with protein kinase A. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we demonstrate that delta binds core RNAP with an apparent affinity of 2.5 x 10(6) M-1, but we are unable to demonstrate the formation of a ternary complex containing core enzyme, delta, and sigmaA.    Three genes (sspH, sspL, and tlp) encoding new, minor small, acid-soluble proteins (SASP) unique to spores of Bacillus subtilis are expressed only in the forespore compartment during sporulation of this organism. The sspH and sspL genes are monocistronic, whereas tlp is the second gene in an operon with a second small orf, which we have termed sspN. The sspH and sspL genes are recognized primarily by the forespore-specific sigma factor for RNA polymerase, sigmaG; the sspN-tlp operon is recognized equally well by sigmaG and the other forespore-specific sigma factor, sigmaF. Sequences centered 10 and 35nt upstream of the 5&apos;-ends of sspH, sspL, and sspN mRNAs all show homology to -10 and -35 sequences recognized by sigmaF and sigmaG, which are generally quite similar. Mutations disrupting the sspH, sspL, sspN-tlp, or tlp loci cause a loss of the appropriate SASP from spores, but have no discernible effect on sporulation, spore properties, or spore germination.    Gene orders have been shown to be generally unstable by comprehensive analyses in several complete genomes. In this study, we examined instability of genome structures within operons, where functionally related genes are clustered. We compared gene orders of known operons obtained from Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis with corresponding those of operons in 11 complete genome sequences. We found that in many cases, gene orders within operons could be shuffled frequently during evolution, although several operon structures, such as ribosomal protein operons, were well conserved. This suggests that shuffling of a genome structure is virtually neutral in long-term evolution. Moreover, degrees of instability of the operon structures depended on the genomes examined. Variation in degrees of instability of the genome structures was likely to be related to differences in amounts of insertion sequences. Effects on transcription regulation are also discussed in association with operon destruction.    The sigmaB transcription factor of the bacterium Bacillus subtilis controls the synthesis of over 100 general stress proteins that are induced by growth-limiting conditions. Genetic evidence suggests that RsbR modulates the phosphorylation state of the RsbS antagonist in the signaling pathway that regulates sigmaB activity in response to environmental stresses that limit growth. According to the current model, the phosphorylated RsbS antagonist is unable to complex RsbT, which is then released to initiate a signaling cascade that ultimately activates sigmaB. Here, we show that the RsbR protein itself has no kinase activity but instead stimulates RsbS phosphorylation by the RsbT serine kinase in vitro. We further show that in addition to its previously known serine kinase activity directed toward the RsbS antagonist, purified RsbT also possesses a threonine kinase activity directed toward residues 171 and 205 of the RsbR modulator. Threonine residues 171 and 205 were each found to be important for RsbR function in vivo, and phosphorylation of these residues abolished the ability of RsbR to stimulate RsbT kinase activity in vitro. These results are consistent with a model in which RsbR modulates the kinase activity of RsbT directed toward its RsbS antagonist in vivo, either specifically in response to environmental signals or as part of a feedback mechanism to prevent continued signaling. Copyright 1999 Academic Press.    Cell-specific activation of transcription factor sigmaF during sporulation in Bacillus subtilis requires the formation of the polar septum and the activity of a serine phosphatase (SpoIIE) located in the septum. The SpoIIE phosphatase indirectly activates sigmaF by dephosphorylating a protein (SpoIIAA-P) in the pathway that controls the activity of the transcription factor. By use of a SpoIIE-GFP fusion protein in time-course and time-lapse experiments and by direct visualization of septa in living cells, we show that SpoIIE is present in the predivisional sporangium, where it often localizes near both cell poles in structures known as E-rings. We also present evidence consistent with the view that SpoIIE is present in both progeny cells after polar division. These findings are incompatible with a model for the control of sigmaF activity in which the phosphatase is simply sequestered to one cell. Instead, we conclude that the function of SpoIIE is subject to regulation, and we present evidence that this occurs in two stages. The first stage, which involves the phosphatase function of SpoIIE, depends on the cell division protein FtsZ and could correspond to the FtsZ-dependent assembly of SpoIIE into E-rings. The second stage occurs after the dephosphorylation of SpoIIAA-P and is dependent on the later-acting, cell-division protein DivIC. Evidence based on the use of modified and mutant forms of the phosphatase protein indicates that SpoIIE blocks the capacity of unphosphorylated SpoIIAA to activate sigmaF until formation of the polar septum is completed.    The alkaline shock protein Asp23 was identified as a sigmaB-dependent protein in Staphylococcus aureus. In Bacillus subtilis, the asp23 promoter from S. aureus is regulated like other sigmaB-dependent promoters, which are strongly induced by heat and ethanol stress. However, almost no induction of asp23 expression was found after heat or ethanol stress in S. aureus MA13 grown in a synthetic medium, where the basal expression level of asp23 is high. Under the same experimental conditions the sigmaB gene itself showed a similar expression pattern: it was highly expressed in synthetic medium but not induced by heat or ethanol stress. In contrast, sigmaB activity was increased by heat stress when the cells were grown in a complex medium. The constitutive expression of sigB and sigmaB-dependent stress genes in S. aureus MA13 grown in a synthetic medium is in a sharp contrast to the regulation of sigmaB activity in B. subtilis, and needs further investigation. A deletion of 11 bp in the rsbU gene, which encodes the phosphatase that acts on RsbV (the anti-anti-sigma factor), in S. aureus NCTC 8325-4 might be responsible for the failure of heat stress to activate sigmaB in complex medium, and thus reduce the initiation of transcription at sigmaB-dependent promoters in this strain.    The beta-galactosidase-encoding bgaM gene of Bacillus megaterium DSM319 and the divergently orientated bgaR operon were isolated and sequenced. Both traits are subject to catabolite repression. A set of single-gene replacement mutants was generated and used to analyze gene function. BgaR was found to be a XylS/AraC-type positive transcriptional regulator of bgaM; a potential regulator binding site overlaps the bgaM promoter. A mechanism for regulation of beta-galactosidase expression in B. megaterium is proposed.    The deduced product of the Bacillus subtilis ytvP gene is similar to that of ORF13, a gene of unknown function in the Lactococcus lactis histidine biosynthesis operon. A B. subtilis ytvP mutant was auxotrophic for histidine. The only enzyme of the histidine biosynthesis pathway that remained uncharacterized in B. subtilis was histidinol phosphate phosphatase (HolPase), catalyzing the penultimate step of this pathway. HolPase activity could not be detected in crude extracts of the ytvP mutant, while purified glutathione S-transferase-YtvP fusion protein exhibited strong HolPase activity. These observations demonstrated that HolPase is encoded by ytvP in B. subtilis and led us to rename this gene hisJ. Together with the HolPase of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and the presumed HolPases of L. lactis and Schizosaccharomyces pombe, HisJ constitutes a family of related enzymes that are not homologous to the HolPases of Escherichia coli, Salmonella typhimurium, and Haemophilus influenzae.    Dephosphorylation of SpoIIAA-P by SpoIIE is strictly dependent on the presence of the bivalent metal ions Mn2+ or Mg2+. Replacement by Ala of one of the four Asp residues, invariant in all representatives of protein phosphatase 2C, completely abolished the SpoIIE phosphatase activity in vitro, whilst replacement of the Asp residues by another acidic amino acid, Glu, had varying effects on the activities of the resulting mutated proteins. D610E and D795E exhibited some residual activity while D628E and D745E were without enzymatic activity. The results suggest that the functional model in which metal-associated water molecules are involved in the dephosphorylation reaction catalyzed by human protein phosphatase 2C alpha can also be applied to the bacterial protein phosphatase 2C-like protein.    Metal ions uptake is mainly studied for iron, as it has often been implicated in bacterial virulence. Although Listeria monocytogenes virulence is expected to be controlled by the iron availability, little is known about such an uptake and its regulation. We describe the analysis of the first operon involved in metal ions uptake in L. monocytogenes. Its three ORFs encode respectively (1) an ABC protein, likely implicated in zinc uptake, (2) a hydrophobic membrane protein, generally associated with ABC proteins and (3) a ferric uptake regulator-like protein, that we named zinc uptake regulator, as it shows strong homologies with the zinc uptake regulator, a regulator of the zinc homeostasis in Bacillus subtilis. The expression of this operon is regulated by the zinc concentration.    A recombinant bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccine has been developed, which constitutively secretes interleukin (IL)-2. Groups of deer were immunized with either normal BCG (Pasteur 1173 P2 strain) or recombinant BCG (rBCG/IL-2) and their immune responses were monitored over 3 months. Animals gained weight over this period and showed no signs of adverse reactions to either vaccine. Lymphocyte transformation responses did not differ significantly between the two groups. No antibody that was specific for BCG was detected in any animal. Intradermal skin-test responses to BCG antigens showed that the rBCG/IL-2 induced a smaller delayed-type hypersensitivity response than the normal BCG. Cytokine transcription was determined by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). While IL-2 and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) levels did not differ significantly between the two groups, the level of IL-4 was found to be lower in the group given rBCG/IL-2. This resulted in a strong interferon-gamma:IL-4 ratio, suggesting a skewing of the immune response towards a Type 1 response. The rate at which the vaccine was eliminated from the host was the same regardless of whether BCG or rBCG was used. At autopsy (3 months after vaccination) 99.99% of the organisms had been eliminated. The small number of organisms isolated from the draining lymph node of animals given rBCG/IL-2 were grown in antibiotic-containing media. They were shown to still contain the shuttle plasmid and to secrete biologically active IL-2, indicating that the plasmid was stably maintained despite the host&apos;s immune response and in the absence of antibiotic selection.    Transcription of the hbs gene under vegetative growth condition is subject to repression when cells enter in late exponential phase. We have determined the sites at which transcription of the hbs gene initiates in vitro. On a supercoiled template, transcription of the hbs gene is initiated by sigmaARNAP at two overlapping hbs promoters (P1 and P3). We have demonstrated that highly purified Hbsu protein acts as a repressor of its own synthesis. The binding of the sequence-independent DNA-binding and DNA-bending Hbsu protein does not seem to exclude sigmaARNAP from the promoters. In this report we show that Hbsu, in vitro, does not repress transcription by a mere steric hindrance on sigmaARNAP binding.    Shigella flexneri is an intracellular pathogen that is able to move within the cytoplasm of infected cells by the continual assembly of actin onto one pole of the bacterium. IcsA, an outer membrane protein, is localized to the old pole of the bacterium and is both necessary and sufficient for actin assembly. IcsA is slowly cleaved from the bacterial surface by the protease IcsP (SopA). Absence of IcsP leads to an alteration in the distribution of surface IcsA, such that the polar cap is maintained and some IcsA is distributed along the lateral walls of the bacillus. The mechanism of unipolar localization of IcsA and the role of IcsP in its unipolar localization are incompletely understood. Here, we demonstrate that cleavage of IcsA occurs exclusively in the outer membrane and that IcsP is localized to the outer membrane. In addition, we show that IcsA at the old pole is susceptible to cleavage by IcsP and that native IcsP is active at the pole. Taken together, these data indicate that IcsP cleaves IcsA over the entire bacterial surface. Finally, we show that, immediately after induction from a tightly regulated promoter, IcsA is expressed exclusively at the old pole in both the icsP- icsA- and the icsA- background. These data demonstrate that unipolar localization of IcsA results from its direct targeting to the pole, followed by its diffusion laterally in the outer membrane.    Recently, we identified the maltose inducible alpha-glucosidase MalL of Bacillus subtilis. The malL gene encodes a 561-residue protein with amino acid identities to several alpha-glucosidases and is located in a nine-gene spanning gene cluster, which is presumably organized in an operon. MalL was overproduced, purified, and its enzymatic characteristics were described in more detail. This characterization of the enzyme showed a protein stable up to 37 degrees C after temperature treatment for 15 min and exhibiting an optimal reaction temperature of 42 degrees C. Various disaccharides such as sucrose, maltose, and isomaltose were hydrolyzed with different efficiencies. MalL also hydrolyzes longer maltodextrins from maltotriose up to maltohexaose, but not maltoheptaose, palatinose, isomaltotriose, or isomaltotetraose. MalL expression is subject to both maltose induction and carbon catabolite repression. In this article, we present data demonstrating that induction of MalL expression also occurs when starch, amylose, or glycogen are present in the growth medium. The hydrolysis of these substrates by alpha-amylase presumably leads to products which, when taken up into the cytoplasm, trigger the initiation of maltose operon transcription. Furthermore, MalL expression varies temporally, showing a second induction in the stationary growth phase.    A novel operon, czrAB (zinc-responsible genes), was identified in the chromosome of Staphylococcus aureus. The operon consists of two genes, czrA and czrB. The czrA gene, coding for an 11.5 kDa protein, was homologous to cadC, arsR of S. aureus plasmid pI258 and smtB of Synechococcus PCC7942. The czrB, coding for a 36 kDa membrane spanning protein, was homologous to the czcD gene, cobalt, zinc and the cadmium-resistant factor of Bacillus subtilis and Alcaligenes eutrophus. In the presence of zinc (0.1-10 mM), the transcription of czrAB was enhanced in a concentration-dependent manner. Other heavy metals, such as cobalt, copper, manganese and nickel showed no effect on czrAB expression. The disruptant of the czrB gene became sensitive to zinc ion (MIC, 2 mM; MBC, 10 mM), and the complementation with the plasmid recovered the resistance to zinc at the same concentration as a parental strain (MIC, 5 mM; MBC, 20 mM). The disruptant accumulated intracellular zinc up to 0.4 mg per g dry weight of the organism, while that of the parental strain was 0.25 mg per g dry weight. The findings indicated that the novel operon czrAB should play a role in the transportation of zinc across the cell membrane to maintain the proper intracellular concentration.    The gene encoding ClpC in Bacillus anthracis was amplified from the chromosome by polymerase chain reaction using degenerate oligonucleotide primers. These primers also amplified a second DNA fragment identified as a clpB homolog. Both genes were suggested to be functional. Contrary to Bacillus subtilis which possesses clpC but not clpB, many Bacillus species were found to harbor both clpC and clpB. We also found that Clostridium strains could possess clpB, clpC, or both. All the Gram-negative strains tested had clpB only.    Bacillus thuringiensis accumulates, primarily during sporulation, large quantities of insecticidal protoxins which are deposited as crystalline, intracellular inclusions. Most subspecies contain several plasmid-encoded cry genes, each of which has a unique specificity. The overall toxicity profile of a subspecies depends not only on the array of cry genes present but also on the relative expression of the genes. In general, transcription depends on sporulation-specific sigma factors, but little is known about regulation of expression of the individual genes. In order to determine whether expression of a particular cry gene varies in different subspecies, lacZ fusions to the cry promoters of two protoxin genes (cry1 class) were constructed. Protoxin accumulation and mRNA contents were also measured by performing immunoblotting and Northern analyses, respectively. The expression of a cry1Ab-lacZ fusion, but not the expression of a cry1C-lacZ fusion, was three to four times lower in B. thuringiensis subsp. aizawai strains than in B. thuringiensis subsp. kurstaki or B. thuringiensis subsp. tolworthi. Also, the Cry1Ab antigen and steady-state mRNA contents of B. thuringiensis subsp. aizawai were lower. The regulation of the genes must involve regions upstream of the promoters which are unique to each cry gene since (i) mutations in the upstream region of the cry1Ab gene resulted in enhanced expression in B. thuringiensis subsp. aizawai and (ii) no differences were found when the lacZ fusions contained the cry1Ab promoters but no upstream sequences. The capacity to regulate each of the protoxin genes must be a factor in the overall protoxin composition of a subspecies and thus its toxicity profile.    Bacillus subtilis responds to various stimuli (heat, ethanol and salt stress, energy starvation) with the induction of general stress proteins (GSPs). Most of them belong to the stress and stationary-phase regulon controlled by the alternative sigma factor sigmaB. The majority of sigmaB-dependent proteins are thought to provide a precautionary general stress resistance in stressed or starved cells. In this report, the identification and transcriptional analysis of nine new members of the sigmaB regulon are described. The biochemical function was not determined for any of the proteins encoded by the nine new sigmaB-dependent stress genes, however, similarities to proteins in the databases allowed a distinction between proteins with putative (i-iv) and unknown (v) function. The putative functions of BmrU, YcdF, YdaD, YdaP, YhdN and YocK underline the suggested protective role of sigmaB-dependent GSPs and also elucidate new areas where sigmaB might play an important role. (i) The finding that the bmrUR operon is under sigmaB control indicates that the elimination of multidrug compounds might be a new function in multiple stress resistance. (ii) YcdF and YdaD resemble NAD(P)-dependent dehydrogenases. Both proteins could be involved in the generation of NAD(P)H and therefore in the maintenance of the intracellular redox balance under stress. (iii) The ydaP gene might belong to the increasing number of sigmaB-dependent genes whose orthologues are under the control of sigmas in Escherichia coli, indicating that both regulons may fulfil similar functions. (iv) YhdN shows weak similarities to potassium ion channel proteins and YocK shows resemblance to the DnaK suppressor protein DksA. (v) Three new sigmaB-dependent genes (ydaE, ydaG and yfkM) encoding proteins with still unknown functions were also described. Further analyses of corresponding mutants might allow a first prediction of their function within the framework of the general stress regulon.    The completed genome sequence of the temperate Streptomyces phage straight phiC31 is reported. straight phiC31 contains genes that are related by sequence similarities to several other dsDNA phages infecting many diverse bacterial hosts, including Escherichia, Arthrobacter, Mycobacterium, Rhodobacter, Staphylococcus, Bacillus, Streptococcus, Lactobacillus and Lactococcus. These observations provide further evidence that dsDNA phages from diverse bacterial hosts are related and have had access to a common genetic pool. Analysis of the late genes was particularly informative. The sequences of the head assembly proteins (portal, head protease and major capsid) were conserved between straight phiC31, coliphage HK97, staphylococcal phage straight phiPVL, two Rhodobacter capsulatus prophages and two Mycobacterium tuberculosis prophages. These phages and prophages (where non-defective) from evolutionarily diverse hosts are, therefore, likely to share a common head assembly mechanism i.e. that of HK97. The organisation of the tail genes in straight phiC31 is highly reminiscent of tail regions from other phage genomes. The unusual organisation of the putative lysis genes in straight phiC31 is discussed, and speculations are made as to the roles of some inessential early gene products. Similarities between certain phage gene products and eukaryotic dsDNA virus proteins were noted, in particular, the primase/helicases and the terminases (large subunits). Furthermore, the complete sequence clarifies the overall transcription map of the phage during lytic growth and the positions of elements involved in the maintenance of lysogeny.    The gene encoding sigmaD, sigD, is transcribed from two promoter regions, the fla/che promoter region in front of the fla/che operon and PsigD directly in front of sigD. If sigmaD is translated from transcripts originating from PsigD, the cell is unable to express motility functions but synthesizes autolysins. Therefore, one function of the additional promoter is to allow the cell to express autolysins without expressing motility functions as well.    In Bacillus subtilis, CcpA-dependent carbon catabolite repression (CCR) mediated at several cis-acting carbon repression elements (cre) requires the seryl-phosphorylated form of both the HPr (ptsH) and Crh (crh) proteins. During growth in minimal medium, the ptsH1 mutation, which prevents seryl phosphorylation of HPr, partially relieves CCR of several genes regulated by CCR. Examination of the CCR of the histidine utilization (hut) enzymes in cells grown in minimal medium showed that neither the ptsH1 nor the crh mutation individually had any affect on hut CCR but that hut CCR was abolished in a ptsH1 crh double mutant. In contrast, the ptsH1 mutation completely relieved hut CCR in cells grown in Luria-Bertani medium. The ptsH1 crh double mutant exhibited several growth defects in glucose minimal medium, including reduced rates of growth and growth inhibition by high levels of glycerol or histidine. CCR is partially relieved in B. subtilis mutants which synthesize low levels of active glutamine synthetase (glnA). In addition, these glnA mutants grow more slowly than wild-type cells in glucose minimal medium. The defects in growth and CCR seen in these mutants are suppressed by mutational inactivation of TnrA, a global nitrogen regulatory protein. The inappropriate expression of TnrA-regulated genes in this class of glnA mutants may deplete intracellular pools of carbon metabolites and thereby result in the reduction of the growth rate and partial relief of CCR.    SigB, a newly discovered alternative sigma factor of Staphylococcus aureus, has been shown to play an important role in stress responses and the regulation of virulence factors. The rsbW (orf159) gene is immediately upstream of sigB. Its gene product is homologous to Bacillus subtilis RsbW which under appropriate conditions binds to B. subtilis SigB and functions as an anti-sigma factor or negative posttranslational regulator. To define the function of S. aureus RsbW, both the S. aureus SigB and RsbW proteins were expressed in Escherichia coli and purified. Cross-linking experiments with these purified proteins revealed that RsbW was capable of specific binding to SigB. In an in vitro transcription runoff assay, RsbW prevented SigB-directed transcription from the sar P3 promoter, a known SigB-dependent promoter, and the inhibitory activity of RsbW was found to be concentration dependent. We also identified SigB promoter consensus sequences upstream of the genes encoding alkaline shock protein 23 and coagulase and have demonstrated SigB and RsbW dependence for the promoters in vitro. These results show that RsbW is a protein sequestering anti-sigma factor of S. aureus SigB and suggest that SigB activity in S. aureus is regulated posttranslationally.    During early stages of growth, Streptomyces reticuli synthesizes a hyphae-associated, haem-containing enzyme which exhibits catalase and peroxidase activities with broad substrate specificity (CpeB). The purified dimeric enzyme (160 kDa) consists of two identical subunits. Using anti-CpeB antibodies and an expression- as well as a mini-library, the corresponding cpeB gene was identified and sequenced. It encodes a protein of 740 aa with a molecular mass of 81.3 kDa. The deduced protein shares the highest level of amino acid identity with KatG from Caulobacter crescentus and Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and PerA from Bacillus stearothermophilus. Streptomyces lividans transformants carrying cpeB and the upstream-located furS gene with its regulatory region on the bifunctional vector pWHM3 produced low or enhanced levels of CpeB in the presence or absence of Fe ions, respectively. An in-frame deletion of the major part of furS induces increased CpeB synthesis. The data imply that FurS regulates the transcription of cpeB. The deduced FurS protein is rich in histidine residues, contains a putative N-terminally situated helix-turn-helix motif and has a molecular mass of 15.1 kDa. It shares only 29% amino acid identity with the Escherichia coli ferric uptake regulator (Fur) protein, but about 64% with FurA deduced from the genomic sequences of several mycobacteria. The predicted secondary structures of FurS and FurA are highly similar and considerably divergent from those of the E. coli Fur. In contrast to some Gram-negative bacteria, within several mycobacteria an intact furA gene or a furA pseudogene is upstream of a catalase-peroxidase (katG) gene predicted to encode a functional or a non-functional (Mycobacterium leprae) enzyme. Thus the data obtained for Streptomyces reticuli are expected to serve as an additional model to elucidate the regulation of mycobacterial catalase-peroxidase genes.    Biosynthesis of the compatible solute glycine betaine in Bacillus subtilis confers a considerable degree of osmotic tolerance and proceeds via a two-step oxidation process of choline, with glycine betaine aldehyde as the intermediate. We have exploited the sensitivity of B. subtilis strains defective in glycine betaine production against glycine betaine aldehyde to select for mutants resistant to this toxic intermediate. These strains were also defective in choline uptake, and genetic analysis proved that two mutations affecting different genetic loci (opuB and opuC) were required for these phenotypes. Molecular analysis allowed us to demonstrate that the opuB and opuC operons each encode a binding protein-dependent ABC transport system that consists of four components. The presumed binding proteins of both ABC transporters were shown to be lipoproteins. Kinetic analysis of [14C]-choline uptake via OpuB (K(m) = 1 microM; Vmax = 21 nmol min-1 mg-1 protein) and OpuC (K(m) = 38 microM; Vmax = 75 nmol min-1 mg-1 protein) revealed that each of these ABC transporters exhibits high affinity and substantial transport capacity. Western blotting experiments with a polyclonal antiserum cross-reacting with the presumed substrate-binding proteins from both the OpuB and OpuC transporter suggested that the expression of the opuB and opuC operons is regulated in response to increasing osmolality of the growth medium. Primer extension analysis confirmed the osmotic control of opuB and allowed the identification of the promoter of this operon. The opuB and opuC operons are located close to each other on the B. subtilis chromosome, and their high sequence identity strongly suggests that these systems have evolved from a duplication event of a primordial gene cluster. Despite the close relatedness of OpuB and OpuC, these systems exhibit a striking difference in substrate specificity for osmoprotectants that would not have been predicted readily for such closely related ABC transporters.    In a previous study, we described the use of transposon Tn917-LTV1 for identification of environmentally regulated promoters in Lactococcus lactis. Here, we report the molecular analysis of one of these promoters, P170, that is upregulated at low pH during the transition to stationary phase. The minimal DNA region required for both promoter activity and pH regulation was mapped to a 51 bp fragment located 7 bp upstream of the transcriptional start site. This fragment lacked the consensus -35 promoter region, but it contained an &apos;extended&apos; -10 promoter region. When a 28 bp segment, containing the consensus -35 region and 22 bp upstream of this in a constitutive promoter, was replaced with the corresponding sequence of P170, the hybrid promoter became regulated by pH and growth phase. This demonstrates that the P170 segment contains a cis-acting sequence involved in the control of promoter regulation. Transcriptional analysis showed that P170 is responsible for the transcription of a monocistronic gene orfX encoding a polypeptide homologous to a hypothetical protein from Bacillus subtilis. Analysis of total RNA from L. lactis grown at constant pH confirmed that transcription from P170 was induced between pH 6.5 and pH 6.0, but only when the culture entered stationary phase. Deletion analysis and chemical mutagenesis of P170 defined a specific region within the untranslated mRNA leader that is able to modulate the expression level directed by the P170 promoter. Deletion of a 72 bp HaeIII fragment from this leader region resulted in a 150- to 200-fold increase in the level of gene expression, without affecting the regulation. The functionality was confirmed by introducing this modulating element downstream of other lactococcal promoters.    The Bacillus subtilis 168 genome encodes seven extracytoplasmic function (ECF) RNA polymerase sigma factors of unknown physiological function. The sigM(yhdM) gene, encoding an ECF sigma factor sigma M, is essential for growth and survival in nutrient broth (NB) containing 1.4 M NaCl. Strains insertionally inactivated in the sigM gene form aberrantly shaped cells, which swell and lyse spontaneously during growth in NB medium containing increased levels (0.35-0.7 M) of a wide range of different salts. The sigM gene was co-transcribed with the yhdL and yhdK genes with transcription initiating from two promoters, PA and PM. The transcript from PM was not detected in a sigM mutant, indicating that the expression of sigM was positively autoregulated. Expression of sigM was maximal during exponential growth and was increased by 50% in NB medium containing 0.7 M NaCl. The activity of sigma M is negatively regulated by the proteins encoded by the yhdL and yhdK genes.    To study the role of TNF-alpha in mycobacterial infection, we generated TNF-alpha-knockout (KO) mice, in which the third and fourth exons of the TNF-alpha gene were disrupted. The C57BL/6 KO mice were injected with virulent Mycobacterium tuberculosis strain Kurono or avirulent bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) Pasteur (10(6) colony-forming units), through the tail veins. The major organs were removed at weekly intervals, and morphologic observation, assays of IL-1, IL-12, IFN-gamma, and inducible nitric oxide synthase mRNA expression, and colony counts in the lungs and spleen were performed. Peritoneal macrophages from BCG- and H37Rv strain-treated mice produced significant levels of nitric oxide after stimulation in vitro. Formation of abscesses was seen only in the Kurono-treated groups, and these abscesses contained large numbers of mycobacteria. The administration of recombinant TNF-alpha significantly ameliorated the mycobacterial lesions. IFN-gamma mRNA was expressed significantly in virulent H37Rv-treated groups with time, and the number of mycobacterial colonies per unit weight increased remarkably with time. Nitric oxide production was not observed in H37Rv-treated groups but was seen in BCG-treated groups. We concluded that TNF-alpha played an important role in protective immunity against virulent mycobacteria. Because avirulent mycobacteria did not induce granulomas in TNF-alpha-KO mice, TNF-alpha played an indirect role in granuloma formation.    Little is known about the natural functions of multidrug-efflux transporters expressed by bacteria. Although identified as membrane proteins actively extruding exogenous toxins from the cell, they may actually be involved in the transport of as yet unidentified specific natural substrates. The expression of two highly similar multidrug transporters of Bacillus subtilis, Bmr and Blt, is regulated by specific transcriptional activators, BmrR and BltR, respectively, which respond to different inducer molecules, thus suggesting distinct functions for the two transporters. Here, we describe an alternative mechanism of regulation, which involves a global transcriptional activator, Mta, a member of the MerR family of bacterial regulatory proteins. The individually expressed N-terminal DNA-binding domain of Mta interacts directly with the promoters of bmr and blt and induces transcription of these genes. Additionally, this domain stimulates the expression of the mta gene itself and at least one more gene, ydfK, which encodes a hypothetical membrane protein. These results and the similarity of Mta to the thiostrepton-induced protein TipA of Streptomyces lividans strongly suggest that Mta is an autogenously controlled global transcriptional regulator, whose activity is stimulated by an as yet unidentified inducer. This stimulation is mimicked by the removal of the C-terminal inducer-binding domain. The fact that both Bmr and Blt are controlled by this regulator demonstrates that some of their functions are either identical or, at least, related. Further analysis of Mta-mediated regulation may reveal the natural function of the system of multidrug transporters in B. subtilis and serve as a paradigm for similar systems in other bacteria.    Making a spore in Bacillus subtilis requires the formation of two cells, the forespore and the mother cell, which follow dissimilar patterns of gene expression. Cell specificity is first established in the forespore under the control of the sigma F factor, which is itself activated through the action of the SpoIIE serine phosphatase, an enzyme targeted to the septum between the two cells. Deletion of the 10 transmembrane segments of the SpoIIE protein leads to random distribution of SpoIIE in the cytoplasm. Activation of sigma F is slightly delayed and less efficient than in wild type, but it remains restricted to the forespore in a large proportion of cells and the bacteria sporulate with 30% efficiency. Overexpression of the complete SpoIIE protein in a divIC mutant leads to significant sigma F activity, indicating that the septum requirement for activating sigma F can be bypassed. In contradiction to current models, we propose that genetic asymmetry is not created by unequal distribution of SpoIIE within the sporangium, but by exclusion of an inhibitor of SpoIIE from the forespore. This putative inhibitor would be a cytoplasmic molecule that interacts with SpoIIE and shuts off its phosphatase activity until it disappears specifically from the forespore.    When starved, Bacillus subtilis undergoes asymmetric division to produce two cell types with different fates. The larger mother cell engulfs the smaller forespore, then nurtures it and, eventually, lyses to release a dormant, environmentally resistant spore. Driving these changes is a programme of transcriptional gene regulation. At the heart of the programme are sigma factors, which become active at different times, some only in one cell type or the other, and each directing RNA polymerase to transcribe a different set of genes. The activity of each sigma factor in the cascade is carefully regulated by multiple mechanisms. In some cases, novel proteins control both sigma factor activity and morphogenesis, co-ordinating the programme of gene expression with morphological change. These bifunctional proteins, as well as other proteins involved in sigma factor activation, and even precursors of sigma factors themselves, are targeted to critical locations, allowing the mother cell and forespore to communicate with each other and to co-ordinate their programmes of gene expression. This signalling can result in proteolytic sigma factor activation. Other mechanisms, such as an anti-sigma factor and, perhaps, proteolytic degradation, prevent sigma factors from becoming active in the wrong cell type. Accessory transcription factors modulate RNA polymerase activity at specific promoters. Negative feedback loops limit sigma factor production and facilitate the transition from one sigma factor to the next. Together, the mechanisms controlling sigma factor activity ensure that genes are expressed at the proper time and level in each cell type.    The gram-positive eubacterium Bacillus subtilis is the organism with the largest number of paralogous type I signal peptidases (SPases) known. These are specified both by chromosomal and plasmid-borne genes. The chromosomally encoded SPases SipS and SipT have a major function in precursor processing, and cells depleted of SipS and SipT stop growing and die. In this study, we show that the SPase SipP, specified by the B. subtilis plasmid pTA1015, can functionally replace SipS and SipT, unlike the three chromosomally encoded SPases with a minor function in protein secretion (i.e., SipU, SipV, and SipW). Unexpectedly, SipP is not specifically required for the processing and secretion of Orf1p, which is specified by a gene that is cotranscribed with sipP. These two genes form a conserved structural module of rolling-circle plasmids from B. subtilis. As previously shown for the chromosomal sipS and sipT genes, the transcription of plasmid-borne copies of sipP is temporally controlled, reaching maximal levels during the post-exponential growth phase when the cells secrete proteins at high levels. However, increased transcription of sipP starts at the end of exponential growth, about 2 h earlier than that of sipS and sipT. These data suggest that SipP fulfills a general role in the secretory precursor processing of pTA1015-containing cells.    Soon after asymmetric septation in sporulating Bacillus subtilis cells, sigmaF is liberated in the prespore from inhibition by SpoIIAB. To initiate transcription from its cognate promoters, sigmaF must compete with sigmaA, the housekeeping sigma factor in the predivisional cell, for binding to core RNA polymerase (E). To estimate the relative affinity of E for sigmaA and sigmaF, we made separate mixtures of E with each of the two sigma factors, allowed reconstitution of the holoenzyme, and measured the concentration of free E remaining in each mixture. The affinity of E for sigmaF was found to be about 25-fold lower than that for sigmaA. We used quantitative Western blotting to estimate the concentrations of E, sigmaA, and sigmaF in sporulating cells. The cellular concentrations of E and sigmaA were both about 7.5 &amp;mgr;M, and neither changed significantly during the first 3 h of sporulation. The concentration of sigmaF was extremely low at the beginning of sporulation, but it rose rapidly to a peak after about 2 h. At its peak, the concentration of sigmaF was some twofold higher than that of sigmaA. This difference in concentration cannot adequately account for the replacement of sigmaA holoenzyme by sigmaF holoenzyme in the prespore, and it seems that some further mechanism-perhaps the synthesis or activation of an anti-sigmaA factor-must be responsible for this replacement.    Staphylokinase is a promising blood-clot dissolving agent for the treatment of patients suffering from a heart attack. It would be desirable to produce this protein in large quantities for biochemical characterization and clinical trials. Production of intact, biologically active staphylokinase from bacterial expression systems has been a challenge because of N-terminal microheterogeneity, plasmid instability, or low-production yield. By using a seven-extracellular-protease deficient Bacillus subtilis strain, WB700, intact staphylokinase can be produced via secretion. However, native staphylokinase gene (sak) in a high-copy number plasmid was found to be unstable in B. subtilis. To optimize the production and the stability of the expression vectors, both the promoter and the signal sequence of sak were replaced by B. subtilis promoters (P43, a constitutively expressed promoter; Pamy, a stationary-phase promoter; and PsacB, a sucrose-inducible promoter) and the levansucrase-signal sequence, respectively. This overcame the plasmid instability problem. To enhance transcription from the sacB promoter, degQ encoding a transcriptional activator for sacB and other protease genes was also installed in the expression vector. The use of WB700 as the expression host allowed enhanced production of staphylokinase from the sucrose-inducible plasmid without causing any obvious degradation of staphylokinase. Both the P43 and PsacB (with DegQ) promoters worked well. Over 90% of staphylokinase synthesized can be secreted effectively. With the optimization of both the culture media and the fermentation conditions, production of staphylokinase reached a level of 337 mg/L, and staphylokinase could be purified to homogeneity by a simple three-step purification scheme. Secreted staphylokinase did not show any N-terminal heterogeneity. This presents an attractive system for the production of staphylokinase in both high quality and quantity. Copyright 1999 John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc.    At the onset of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis, two potential division sites are assembled at each pole, one of which will be used to synthesize the asymmetrically positioned sporulation septum. Using the vital stain FM 4-64 to label the plasma membrane of living cells, we examined the fate of these potential division sites in wild-type cells and found that, immediately after the formation of the sporulation septum, a partial septum was frequently synthesized within the mother cell at the second potential division site. Using time-lapse deconvolution microscopy, we were able to watch these partial septa first appear and then disappear during sporulation. Septal dissolution was dependent on sigma E activity and was partially inhibited in mutants lacking the sigma E-controlled proteins SpoIID, SpoIIM and SpoIIP, which may play a role in mediating the degradation of septal peptidoglycan. Our results support a model in which sigma E inhibits division at the second potential division site by two distinct mechanisms: inhibition of septal biogenesis and the degradation of partial septa formed before sigma E activation.    We isolated novel temperature-sensitive mutants of spo0H, spo0H1 and spo0H5, having E61K and G30E amino-acid substitutions within the sigmaH protein, respectively, and located in the highly conserved region, &quot;2&quot;, among prokaryotic sigma factors that participates in binding to core enzyme of RNA polymerase. These mutants showed a sporulation-deficient phenotype at 43 degrees C. Moreover, we successfully isolated suppressor mutants that were spontaneously generated from the spo0H mutants. Our genetic analysis of these suppressor mutations revealed that the suppressor mutations are within the rpoB gene coding for the beta subunit of RNA polymerase. The mutations caused single amino-acid substitutions, E857A and P1055S, in rpoB18 and rpoB532 mutants that were generated from spo0H1 and spo0H5, respectively. Whereas the sigmaH-dependent expression of a spo0A-bgaB fusion was greatly reduced in both spo0H mutants, their expression was partially restored in the suppressor mutants at 43 degrees C. Western blot analysis showed that the level of sigmaH protein in the wild type increased between T0 and T2 and decreased after T3, while the level of sigmaH protein in spo0H mutants was greatly reduced throughout growth, indicating that the mutant sigmaH proteins were rapidly degraded by some unknown proteolytic enzyme(s). The analysis of the half-life of sigmaH protein showed that the short life of sigmaH in spo0H mutants is prolonged in the suppressor mutants. These findings suggest that, at least to some extent, the process of E-sigmaH formation may be involved in stabilization of sigmaH at the onset of sporulation.    A new gene, bkdR (formerly called yqiR), encoding a regulator with a central (catalytic) domain was found in Bacillus subtilis. This gene controls the utilization of isoleucine and valine as sole nitrogen sources. Seven genes, previously called yqiS, yqiT, yqiU, yqiV, bfmBAA, bfmBAB, and bfmBB and now referred to as ptb, bcd, buk, lpd, bkdA1, bkdA2, and bkdB, are located downstream from the bkdR gene in B. subtilis. The products of these genes are similar to phosphate butyryl coenzyme A transferase, leucine dehydrogenase, butyrate kinase, and four components of the branched-chain keto acid dehydrogenase complex: E3 (dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase), E1alpha (dehydrogenase), E1beta (decarboxylase), and E2 (dihydrolipoamide acyltransferase). Isoleucine and valine utilization was abolished in bcd and bkdR null mutants of B. subtilis. The seven genes appear to be organized as an operon, bkd, transcribed from a -12, -24 promoter. The expression of the bkd operon was induced by the presence of isoleucine or valine in the growth medium and depended upon the presence of the sigma factor SigL, a member of the sigma 54 family. Transcription of this operon was abolished in strains containing a null mutation in the regulatory gene bkdR. Deletion analysis showed that upstream activating sequences are involved in the expression of the bkd operon and are probably the target of bkdR. Transcription of the bkd operon is also negatively controlled by CodY, a global regulator of gene expression in response to nutritional conditions.    The PhoP-PhoR two-component regulatory system controls the phosphate deficiency response in B. subtilis. A number of Pho regulon genes which require PhoP approximately P for activation or repression have been identified. The studies reported here were initiated to understand the PhoP-DNA interaction necessary for Pho promoter regulation. The regulatory region of phoD was characterized in detail using oligo-directed mutagenesis, DNase I footprinting, and in vivo transcription assays. These data reveal basic principles of PhoP binding relevant to PhoP&apos;s interaction with other Pho regulon promoters. Our results show that: (i) a dimer of PhoP approximately P is able to bind two consensus repeats in a stable fashion; (ii) PhoP binding is highly cooperative within the core promoter region, which is located from -66 to -17 on the coding strand and contains four TT(A/T/C)ACA-like repeats; (iii) specific bases comprising the TT(A/T/C)ACA consensus are essential for transcriptional activation, but the specific base pairs of the intervening sequences separating the consensus repeats are not important for either PhoP binding or promoter activation; (iv) the spacing between two consensus repeats within a putative dimer binding site in the core region is important for both PhoP binding and promoter activation; (v) the exact spacing between two dimer binding sites within the core region is important for promoter activation but less so for PhoP binding affinity, as long as the repeats are on the same face of the helix; and (vi) the 5&apos; secondary binding region is important for coordinated PhoP binding to the core binding region, making it nearly essential for promoter activation.    The Lactococcus lactis ccpA gene, encoding the global regulatory protein CcpA, was identified and characterized. Northern blot and primer extension analyses showed that the L. lactis ccpA gene is constitutively transcribed from a promoter that does not contain a cre sequence. Inactivation of the ccpA gene resulted in a twofold reduction in the growth rate compared with the wild type on glucose, sucrose and fructose, while growth on galactose was almost completely abolished. The observed growth defects could be complemented by the expression of either the L. lactis or the Bacillus subtilis ccpA gene. The disruption of the ccpA gene reduced the catabolite repression of the gal operon, which contains a cre site at the transcription start site and encodes enzymes involved in galactose catabolism. In contrast, CcpA activates the transcription of the cre-containing promoter of the las operon, encoding the glycolytic enzymes phosphofructokinase, pyruvate kinase and L-lactate dehydrogenase, because its transcription level was fourfold reduced in the ccpA mutant strain compared with the wild-type strain. The lower activities of pyruvate kinase and L-lactate dehydrogenase in the ccpA mutant strain resulted in the production of metabolites characteristic of a mixed-acid fermentation, whereas the fermentation pattern of the wild-type strain was essentially homolactic.    The molecular mechanisms for regulation of the genes involved in the biosynthesis of methionine and cysteine are poorly characterized in Bacillus subtilis. Analyses of the recently completed B. subtilis genome revealed 11 copies of a highly conserved motif. In all cases, this motif was located in the leader region of putative transcriptional units, upstream of coding sequences that included genes involved in methionine or cysteine biosynthesis. Additional copies were identified in Clostridium acetobutylicum and Staphylococcus aureus, indicating conservation in other Gram-positive genera. The motif includes an element resembling an intrinsic transcriptional terminator, suggesting that regulation might be controlled at the level of premature termination of transcription. The 5&apos; portion of all of the leaders could fold into a conserved complex structure. Analysis of the yitJ gene, which is homologous to Escherichia coli metH and metF, revealed that expression was induced by starvation for methionine and that induction was independent of the promoter and dependent on the leader region terminator. Mutation of conserved primary sequence and structural elements supported a model in which the 5&apos; portion of the leader forms an anti-antiterminator structure, which sequesters sequences required for the formation of an antiterminator, which, in turn, sequesters sequences required for the formation of the terminator; the anti-antiterminator is postulated to be stabilized by the binding of some unknown factor when methionine is available. This set of genes is proposed to form a new regulon controlled by a global termination control system, which we designate the S box system, as most of the genes are involved in sulphur metabolism and biosynthesis of methionine and cysteine.    The general stress regulon of Bacillus subtilis is controlled by the transcription factor sigmaB. Environmental stress activates sigmaB via a phosphatase/kinase cascade that triggers sigmaB&apos;s release from an anti sigma factor complex. To determine if the members of the phosphatase/kinase cascade are sufficient to detect environmental stress and activate sigmaB, we expressed sigmaB and its regulators in E. coli. In E. coli, as in B. subtilis, the intact collection of regulators silenced sigmaB, while allowing sigmaB to be active if the cascade&apos;s most upstream negative regulator was deleted. The regulators could not, however, activate sigmaB in response to ethanol treatment or heat shock. In other experiments, the GroEL and DnaK chaperones, known to be important in controlling stress sigma factors in E. coli, were found to be unimportant for sigmaB activity in B. subtilis. The findings argue that stress induction of sigmaB requires novel factors that are B. subtilis specific. Copyright 1999 Academic Press.    The key response-regulator gene of sporulation, spo0A, has been cloned from Bacillus stearothermophilus and the encoded protein purified. The DNA-binding and phospho-acceptor domains of Spo0A have been prepared by tryptic digestion of the intact protein and subsequently crystallized in forms suitable for X-ray crystallographic studies. The DNA-binding domain has been crystallized in two forms, one of which diffracts X-rays to beyond 2. 5 A spacing. The crystals of the phospho-acceptor domain diffract X-rays beyond 2.0 A spacing using synchrotron radiation.    Protein HU is a ubiquitous prokaryotic protein which controls the architecture of genomic DNA. It binds DNA non-specifically and promotes the bending and supercoiling of the double helical structure. HU is involved in many DNA-associated cellular processes, including replication, transcription and the packaging of DNA into chromosome-like structures. Originally determined at medium resolution, the crystal structure of HU has now been refined at 2.0 A resolution. The high-resolution structure shows that the dimeric molecule is essentially a compact platform for two flexible and basic arms which wrap around the DNA molecule. To maximize the protein&apos;s stability, non-secondary structural regions are reduced to a minimum, there is an extensive aromatic hydrophobic core and several salt bridges and hydrogen-bonded water molecules knit together crucial regions. Based on the original medium-resolution structure of HU, several proposals were made concerning the structural basis of HU&apos;s ability to bind, bend and supercoil DNA. Each of these proposals is fully supported by the high-resolution structure. Most notably, the surfaces of the molecule which appear to mediate protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions have the ideal shapes and physicochemical properties to perform these functions.    A mutation, designated hutCR11, which resulted in high expression of the hut operon and release of the catabolite repression and amino-acid repression of hut expression, was isolated and determined to be a T-to-G transversion at position +30 (+1 indicates the transcription-initiation site). In the hutCR11 mutant, levels of hutP mRNA were 5-fold higher than those in wild-type cells under conditions of non-induction and induction and 11-fold higher under conditions of catabolite repression and amino-acid repression. Mutation analysis showed that two types of base change (T--&gt;A and T--&gt;C) at position +30 did not cause high expression of the hut operon, indicating that this was specifically caused by the single base substitution (T--&gt;G) at position +30. The base substitution of A for T at position +30 also led to partial relief of both catabolite repression and amino-acid repression. These results indicate that the nucleotide sequence at +30 is important for regulation of both catabolite repression and amino-acid repression of the hut operon.    GerE is a transcription factor produced in the mother cell compartment of sporulating Bacillus subtilis. It is a critical regulator of cot genes encoding proteins that form the spore coat late in development. Most cot genes, and the gerE gene, are transcribed by sigmaK RNA polymerase. Previously, it was shown that the GerE protein inhibits transcription in vitro of the sigK gene encoding sigmaK. Here, we show that GerE binds near the sigK transcriptional start site, to act as a repressor. A sigK-lacZ fusion containing the GerE-binding site in the promoter region was expressed at a 2-fold lower level during sporulation of wild-type cells than gerE mutant cells. Likewise, the level of SigK protein (i. e. pro-sigmaK and sigmaK) was lower in sporulating wild-type cells than in a gerE mutant. These results demonstrate that sigmaK-dependent transcription of gerE initiates a negative feedback loop in which GerE acts as a repressor to limit production of sigmaK. In addition, GerE directly represses transcription of particular cot genes. We show that GerE binds to two sites that span the -35 region of the cotD promoter. A low level of GerE activated transcription of cotD by sigmaK RNA polymerase in vitro, but a higher level of GerE repressed cotD transcription. The upstream GerE-binding site was required for activation but not for repression. These results suggest that a rising level of GerE in sporulating cells may first activate cotD transcription from the upstream site then repress transcription as the downstream site becomes occupied. Negative regulation by GerE, in addition to its positive effects on transcription, presumably ensures that sigmaK and spore coat proteins are synthesized at optimal levels to produce a germination-competent spore.    During sporulation, Bacillus thuringiensis produces inclusions comprised of different amounts of several related protoxins, each with a unique specificity profile for insect larvae. A major class of these genes designated cry1 have virtually identical dual overlapping promoters, but the upstream sequences differ. A gel retardation assay was used to purify a potential regulatory protein which bound with different affinities to these sequences in three cry1 genes. It was identified as the E2 subunit of pyruvate dehydrogenase. There was specific competition for binding by homologous gene sequences but not by pUC nor Bacillus subtilis DNA; calf thymus DNA competed at higher concentrations. The B. thuringiensis gene encoding E2 was cloned, and the purified glutathione S-transferase-E2 fusion protein footprinted to a consensus binding sequence within an inverted repeat and to a potential bend region, both sites 200-300 base pairs upstream of the promoters. Mutations of these sites in the cry1A gene resulted in decreased binding of the E2 protein and altered kinetics of expression of a fusion of this regulatory region with the lacZ gene. Recruitment of the E2 subunit as a transcription factor could couple the change in post exponential catabolism to the initiation of protoxin synthesis.    The highly conserved DnaK chaperones consist of an N-terminal ATPase domain, a central substrate-binding domain, and a C-terminal domain whose function is not known. Since Bacillus subtilis dnaK was not able to complement an Escherichia coli dnaK null mutant, we performed domain element swap experiments to identify the regions responsible for this finding. It turned out that the B. subtilis DnaK protein needed approximately normal amounts of the cochaperone DnaJ to be functional in E. coli. The ATPase domain and the substrate-binding domain form a species-specific functional unit, while the C-terminal domains, although less conserved, are exchangeable. Deletion of the C-terminal domain in E. coli DnaK affected neither complementation of growth at high temperatures nor propagation of phage lambda but abolished degradation of sigma32.    The deoR gene located just upstream the dra-nupC-pdp operon of Bacillus subtilis encodes the DeoR repressor protein that negatively regulates the expression of the operon at the level of transcription. The control region upstream of the operon was mapped by the use of transcriptional lacZ fusions. It was shown that all of the cis-acting elements, which were necessary for full DeoR regulation of the operon, were included in a 141-bp sequence just upstream of dra. The increased copy number of this control region resulted in titration of the DeoR molecules of the cell. By using mutagenic PCR and site-directed mutagenesis techniques, a palindromic sequence located from position -60 to position -43 relative to the transcription start point was identified as a part of the operator site for the binding of DeoR. Furthermore, it was shown that a direct repeat of five nucleotides, which was identical to the 3&apos; half of the palindrome and was located between the -10 and -35 regions of the dra promoter, might function as a half binding site involved in cooperative binding of DeoR to the regulatory region. Binding of DeoR protein to the operator DNA was confirmed by a gel electrophoresis mobility shift assay. Moreover, deoxyribose-5-phosphate was shown to be a likely candidate for the true inducer of the dra-nupC-pdp expression.    The synthesis and subcellular localization of the proteins that comprise the Bacillus subtilis spore are under a variety of complex controls. To better understand these controls, we have identified and characterized a 31-kDa sporulation protein, called TasA, which is secreted into the culture medium early in sporulation and is also incorporated into the spore. TasA synthesis begins approximately 30 min after the onset of sporulation and requires the sporulation transcription factor genes spo0H and spo0A. The first 81 nucleotides of tasA encode a 27-amino-acid sequence that resembles a signal peptide and which is missing from TasA isolated from a sporulating cell lysate. In B. subtilis cells unable to synthesize the signal peptidase SipW, TasA is not secreted, nor is it incorporated into spores. Cells unable to produce SipW produce a 34-kDa form of TasA, consistent with a failure to remove the N-terminal 27 amino acids. In cells engineered to express sipW and tasA during exponential growth, TasA migrates as a 31-kDa species and is secreted into the culture medium. These results indicate that SipW plays a crucial role in the export of TasA out of the cell and its incorporation into spores. Although TasA is dispensable for sporulation under laboratory conditions, we find that TasA has a broad-spectrum antibacterial activity. We discuss the possibility that during the beginning of sporulation as well as later, during germination, TasA inhibits other organisms in the environment, thus conferring a competitive advantage to the spore.    Sporulation in Bacillus subtilis is initiated by an asymmetric division generating two cells of different size and fate. During a short interval, the smaller forespore harbors only 30% of the chromosome until the remaining part is translocated across the septum. We demonstrate that moving the gene for sigmaF, the forespore-specific transcription factor, in the trapped region of the chromosome is sufficient to produce spores in the absence of the essential activators SpoIIAA and SpoIIE. We propose that transient genetic asymmetry is the device that releases SpoIIE phosphatase activity in the forespore and establishes cell specificity.    The transcriptional antiterminator LicT regulates the induction and carbon catabolite repression of the Bacillus subtilis bglPH operon. LicT is inactive in mutants affected in one of the two general components of the phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP):glycose phosphotransferase system, enzyme I or histidine-containing protein (HPr). We demonstrate that LicT becomes phosphorylated in the presence of PEP, enzyme I and HPr. The phosphoryl group transfer between HPr and LicT is reversible. Phosphorylation of LicT with PEP, enzyme I and HPr led to the appearance of three additional LicT bands on polyacrylamide-urea gels. These bands probably correspond to one-, two- and threefold phosphorylated LicT. After phosphorylation of LicT with [32P]-PEP, enzyme I and HPr, proteolytic digestion of [32P]-P-LicT, separation of the peptides by reverse-phase chromatography, mass spectrometry and N-terminal sequencing of radiolabelled peptides, three histidyl residues were found to be phosphorylated in LicT. These three histidyl residues (His-159, His-207 and His-269) are conserved in most members of the BglG/SacY family of transcriptional antiterminators. Phosphorylation of LicT in the presence of serylphosphorylated HPr (P-Ser-HPr) was much slower compared with its phosphorylation in the presence of HPr. The slower phosphorylation in the presence of P-Ser-HPr leading to reduced LicT activity is presumed to play a role in a recently described LicT-mediated CcpA-independent carbon catabolite repression mechanism operative for the bglPH operon.    Sequence analysis reveals that the Bacillus subtilis 168 tuaABCDEFGH operon encodes enzymes required for the polymerization of teichuronic acid as well as for the synthesis of one of its precursors, the UDP-glucuronate. Mutants deficient in any of the tua genes, grown in batch cultures under conditions of phosphate limitation, were characterized by reduced amounts of uronate in their cell walls. The teichuronic acid operon belongs to the Pho regulon, as phosphate limitation induces its transcription. Placing the tuaABCDEFGH operon under the control of the inducible Pspac promoter allowed its constitutive expression independently of the phosphate concentration in the medium; the level of uronic acid in cell walls was dependent on the concentration of the inducer. Apparently, owing to an interdependence between teichoic and teichuronic acid incorporation into the cell wall, in examined growth conditions, the balance between the two polymers is maintained in order to insure a constant level of the wall negative charge.    The expression and activity of transcription termination factor Rho and the requirement for transcription elongation factors NusA and NusG was investigated in Bacillus subtilis. Rho was present at &lt; 5% of the level found in Escherichia coli, but Rho factors from these two bacteria had similar properties as RNA-activated ATPases and in vitro termination of transcription on the lambda tR1 terminator. The B. subtilis rho gene was autoregulated at the level of transcription; autoregulation required sequences within the rho mRNA leader region and gene. To date, the B. subtilis rho is the only gene from a Gram-positive bacterium found to be regulated by Rho. Rho was not involved in bulk mRNA decay in B. subtilis. The E. coli elongation factors NusA and NusG target Rho, and the importance of these proteins in B. subtilis was examined by gene disruption. The B. subtilis NusG was inessential for both the viability and the autoregulation of Rho, whereas NusA was essential, and the requirement for NusA was independent of Rho. This contrasts with E. coli in which NusG is essential but NusA becomes dispensable if Rho terminates transcription less efficiently.    Spo0A is a two-domain response regulator required for the initiation of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. Spo0A is activated by phosphorylation of its regulatory domain by a multicomponent phosphorelay. To define the role of the regulatory domain in the activation of Spo0A, we have characterized four of the sof mutations in vitro. The sof mutations were identified previously as suppressors of the sporulation-negative phenotype resulting from a deletion of the gene for one of the phosphorelay components, spo0F. Like wild-type Spo0A, the transcription stimulation properties of all of the Sof proteins were dependent upon phosphorylation. Sof mutants from two classes were improved substrates for direct phosphorylation by the KinA sensor kinase, providing an explanation for their suppression properties. Two other Sof proteins showed a phosphorylation-dependent enhancement of the stability of the Sof approximately P-RNA polymerase-DNA complex. One of these mutants, Sof114, increased the stability of the Sof114 approximately P-RNAP-DNA complex without increasing its own affinity for the spoIIG promoter. A comparison of the location of the sof mutations with mutations in CheY suggests that phosphorylation of Spo0A results in the exposure of a region in the regulatory domain that interacts with RNA polymerase, thereby contributing to the signal transduction mechanism.    ecs is a three-cistron operon of Bacillus subtilis, encoding proteins with similarity to the ATPase (EcsA) and hydrophobic components (EcsB) of ABC transporters. The ecsA26 point mutation was shown to cause a strong processing defect of a secreted alpha-amylase precursor (preAmyQ) and of three other exoproteins. Northern analysis of the level of amyQ mRNA showed that ecsA26 also decreases amyQ transcription. This effect too was pleiotropic, as judged by a drastic decrease in the expression from an exoprotease promoter of a reporter protein. A knockout mutation of the ecsB cistron caused a processing defect similar to ecsA26 but, unlike ecsA26, did not affect amyQ transcription. These was also no defect in transcription in the ecsA ecsB double mutant. Thus, an intact ecsB product was required for the downregulation of amyQ by the mutant ecsA. These results suggest a dual regulatory function for Ecs, in which Ecs, possibly as part of a signal transduction mechanism, regulates some component(s) of the protein secretion apparatus as well as secretory protein transcription in a co-ordinated fashion.    In vitro transcripts of Bacillus stearothermophilus 23S rRNA can be reconstituted into catalytically active 50S ribosomal subunits with an efficiency only 3-4-fold lower than that of natural 23S rRNA. Thus, post-transcriptional modifications in 23S rRNA are not essential for the assembly or function of the 50S subunit of the ribosome. This reconstitution sytem has been used to characterize the peptidyl transferase activity of site-directed mutations in 23S rRNA at positions G2252, U2506, U2584, and A2602 (Escherichia coli numbering), demonstrating its potential for the analysis of the role played by 23S rRNA in the function of the 50S subunit of the ribosome.    Multidrug-efflux transporters demonstrate an unusual ability to recognize multiple structurally dissimilar toxins. A comparable ability to bind diverse hydrophobic cationic drugs is characteristic of the Bacillus subtilis transcription regulator BmrR, which upon drug binding activates expression of the multidrug transporter Bmr. Crystal structures of the multidrug-binding domain of BmrR (2.7 A resolution) and of its complex with the drug tetraphenylphosphonium (2.8 A resolution) revealed a drug-induced unfolding and relocation of an alpha helix, which exposes an internal drug-binding pocket. Tetraphenylphosphonium binding is mediated by stacking and van der Waals contacts with multiple hydrophobic residues of the pocket and by an electrostatic interaction between the positively charged drug and a buried glutamate residue, which is the key to cation selectivity. Similar binding principles may be used by other multidrug-binding proteins.    The &quot;extended -10&quot; motif described originally in Escherichia coli promoters occurs frequently in other bacterial promoters. Most Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage o29 promoters contain this motif. To analyse the influence of the motif on sigmaA-RNA polymerase transcription, the 5&apos;-TG-3&apos; dinucleotide was changed to 5&apos;-AC-3&apos; in three o29 promoters. This change impaired RNA polymerase binding to the promoters; the yields of closed and open complexes were reduced independently of other differences inherent to each promoter. The mutation abolished transcription in vitro from a promoter lacking the consensus sequence at the -35 hexamer. In contrast, at other promoters with a -35 consensus sequence, the yield of run off transcription was not reduced by the mutation. Indeed an apparent interference phenomenon at high polymerase/DNA ratios was relieved. These results indicate that the extended -10 motif provides contact points for sigmaA-RNA polymerase with a role restricted to the first steps of transcription. Copyright 1999 Academic Press.    In Bacillus subtilis, the adjacent genes gltX, cysE, and cysS encoding respectively glutamyl-tRNA synthetase, serine acetyl-transferase, and cysteinyl-tRNA synthetase, are transcribed as an operon but a gltX probe reveals only the presence of a monocistronic gltX mRNA (Gagnon et al., 1994, J Biol Chem 269:7473-7482). The transcript of the gltX-cysE intergenic region contains putative alternative secondary structures forming a p-independent terminator or an antiterminator, and a conserved sequence (T-box) found in the leader of most aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase and many amino acid biosynthesis genes in B. subtilis and in other Gram-positive eubacteria. The transcription of these genes is initiated 45 nt upstream from the first codon of gltX and is under the control of a sigmaA-type promoter. Analysis of the in vivo transcript of this operon revealed a cleavage site immediately downstream from the p-independent terminator structure. In vitro transcription analysis, using RNA polymerases from Escherichia coli, B. subtilis, and that encoded by the T7 phage, in the presence of various RNase inhibitors, shows the same cleavage. This processing generates mRNAs whose 5&apos;-end half-lives differ by a factor of 2 in rich medium, and leaves putative secondary structures at the 3&apos; end of the gltX transcript and at the 5&apos; end of the cysE/S mRNA, which may be involved in the stabilization of these mRNAs. By its mechanism and its position, this cleavage differs from that of the other known transcripts encoding aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases in B. subtilis.    D-Mannitol is taken up by Bacillus stearothermophilus and phosphorylated via a phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent phosphotransferase system (PTS). The genes involved in the mannitol uptake were recently cloned and sequenced. One of the genes codes for a putative transcriptional regulator, MtlR. The presence of a DNA binding helix-turn-helix motif and two antiterminator-like PTS regulation domains, suggest that MtlR is a DNA-binding protein, the activity of which can be regulated by phosphorylation by components of the PTS. To demonstrate DNA binding of MtlR to a region upstream of the mannitol promoter, by DNA footprinting, MtlR was overproduced and purified. EI, HPr, IIAmtl, and IICBmtl of B. stearothermophilus were purified and used to demonstrate that MtlR can be phosphorylated and regulated by HPr and IICBmtl, in vitro. Phosphorylation of MtlR by HPr increases the affinity of MtlR for its binding site, whereas phosphorylation by IICBmtl results in a reduction of this affinity. The differential effect of phosphorylation, by two different proteins, on the DNA binding properties of a bacterial transcriptional regulator has not, to our knowledge, been described before. Regulation of MtlR by two components of the PTS is an example of an elegant control system sensing both the presence of mannitol and the need to utilize this substrate.    The Bacillus subtilis ResD-ResE two-component system is responsible for the regulation of a number of genes involved in cytochrome c biogenesis and haem A biosynthesis, and it is required for anaerobic respiration in this organism. We reported previously that the operon encoding these regulatory proteins, the resABCDE operon, is induced under several conditions, one of which is phosphate starvation. We report here that this transcription requires the PhoP-PhoR two-component system, whereas other induction conditions do not. The PhoPP response regulator directly binds to and is essential for transcriptional activation of the resABCDE operon as well as being involved in repression of the internal resDE promoter during phosphate-limited growth. The concentration of ResD in various phoP mutant strains corroborates the role of PhoP in the production of ResD. These interactions result in a regulatory network that ties together the cellular functions of respiration/energy production and phosphate starvation. Significantly, this represents the first evidence for direct involvement of one two-component system in transcription of a second two-component system.    The tetA(L) gene of Bacillus subtilis encodes a transmembrane protein that can function as a Tc-metal/H+ antiporter, conferring low-level resistance to tetracycline. The TetA(L) coding sequence is preceded by a leader region that contains a 20-amino-acid open reading frame and an appropriately spaced ribosome binding site. Expression of the gene is induced by addition of tetracycline, which is thought to act by binding to ribosomes that translate the tetA(L) leader peptide coding sequence. Here we demonstrate that induction of tetA(L) expression includes minor transcriptional and major translational components. Deletion and point mutations of the tetA(L) leader region were constructed to probe the mechanism of translational induction. To account for the observed mutant phenotypes, we propose that tetA(L) expression is regulated by a translational reinitiation mechanism.    The Bacillus subtilis sigW gene encodes an extracytoplasmic function (ECF) sigma factor that is expressed in early stationary phase from a sigW-dependent autoregulatory promoter, PW. Using a consensus-based search procedure, we have identified 15 operons preceded by promoters similar in sequence to PW. At least 14 of these promoters are dependent on sigma W both in vivo and in vitro as judged by lacZ reporter fusions, run-off transcription assays and nucleotide resolution start site mapping. We conclude that sigma W controls a regulon of more than 30 genes, many of which encode membrane proteins of unknown function. The sigma W regulon includes a penicillin binding protein (PBP4*) and a co-transcribed amino acid racemase (RacX), homologues of signal peptide peptidase (YteI), flotillin (YuaG), ABC transporters (YknXYZ), non-haem bromoperoxidase (YdjP), epoxide hydrolase (YfhM) and three small peptides with structural similarities to bacteriocin precursor polypeptides. We suggest that sigma W activates a large stationary-phase regulon that functions in detoxification, production of anti-microbial compounds or both.    We identified, in the facultative intracellular pathogen Listeria monocytogenes, a previously unknown Clp ATPase, unique among the HSP100 proteins because of the presence of a short N-terminal region with a potential zinc finger motif. This protein of 726 amino acids is highly homologous to ClpE of Bacillus subtilis, and is a member of a new subfamily of HSP100/Clp ATPases. The clpE gene is transcribed as a monocistronic mRNA from a typical consensus sigma A promoter. clpE is not stimulated by various stresses, but is upregulated in a clpC mutant. This is the first example of cross-regulation between Clp ATPases. By constructing a clpE mutant of L. monocytogenes, we found that ClpE is required for prolonged survival at 42 degrees C and is involved in the virulence of this pathogen. A double mutant deficient in both ClpE and ClpC was avirulent in a mouse model and completely eliminated in the liver. Electron microscopy studies did not show any morphological alterations in clpE or clpC mutants. In the clpE-clpC double mutant, however, cell division was affected, indicating that ClpE acts synergistically with ClpC in cell septation. These results show that the Clp chaperones play a crucial role in both cell division and virulence of L. monocytogenes.    Carbon catabolite repression (CCR) of several Bacillus subtilis catabolic genes is mediated by ATP-dependent phosphorylation of Ser46 of the histidine-containing protein (HPr), a phosphocarrier protein of the phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP): sugar phosphotransferase system. A recently discovered HPr-like protein of B. subtilis, Crh, cannot be phosphorylated by PEP and enzyme I but becomes phosphorylated at Ser46 by the ATP-dependent, metabolite-activated HPr kinase. Genetic data suggested that Crh is also implicated in CCR. We here demonstrate that in a ptsH1 crh1 mutant, in which Ser46 of both HPr and Crh is replaced with an alanyl residue, expression of the beta-xylosidase-encoding xynB gene was completely relieved from CCR. No effect on CCR could be observed in strains carrying the crh1 allele, suggesting that under the experimental conditions P-Ser-HPr can substitute for P-Ser-Crh in CCR. By contrast, a ptsH1 mutant was slightly relieved from CCR of xynB, indicating that P-Ser-Crh can substitute only partly for P-Ser-HPr. Mapping experiments allowed us to identify the xyn promoter and a catabolite responsive element (cre) located 229 bp downstream of the transcription start point. Using DNase I footprinting experiments, we could demonstrate that similar to P-Ser-HPr, P-Ser-Crh stimulates binding of CcpA to the xyn cre. Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate was found to strongly enhance binding of the P-Ser-HPr/CcpA and P-Ser-Crh/CcpA complexes to the xyn cre, but had no effect on binding of CcpA alone. Copyright 1999 Academic Press.    The 5&apos; end of the Enterococcus faecalis pyr operon specifies, in order, the promoter, a 5&apos; untranslated leader, the pyrR gene encoding the regulatory protein for the operon, a 39-nucleotide (nt) intercistronic region, the pyrP gene encoding a uracil permease, a 13-nt intercistronic region, and the pyrB gene encoding aspartate transcarbamylase. The 5&apos; leader RNA is capable of forming stem-loop structures involved in attenuation control of the operon. No attenuation regions, such as those found in the Bacillus subtilis pyr operon, are present in the pyrR-pyrP or pyrP-pyrB intercistronic regions. Several lines of evidence demonstrate that the E. faecalis pyr operon is repressed by uracil via transcriptional attenuation at the single 5&apos; leader termination site and that attenuation is mediated by the PyrR protein.    The pyrimidine nucleotide biosynthetic (pyr) operon of Bacillus subtilis is regulated by a transcriptional attenuation mechanism in which termination of transcription at points upstream of the genes being regulated is promoted by the binding of a regulatory protein, PyrR, to specific sequences in the pyr mRNA. Binding of PyrR to pyr mRNA is stimulated by uridine nucleotides and causes changes in the mRNA secondary structure. This model is supported by extensive molecular genetic analysis. PyrR, which is encoded by the first gene of the pyr operon, is also a uracil phosphoribosyltransferase, although it has little amino acid sequence resemblance to other bacterial uracil phosphoribosyltransferases. Purified B. subtilis pyrR promotes attenuation of pyr transcription in vitro and binds specifically to pyr RNA sequences. The crystallographic structure of PyrR demonstrates the similarity of its tertiary structure to other phosphoribosyltransferases and suggests the surface to which RNA binds. PyrR is widely distributed among eubacteria and appears to regulate pyr genes not only by the attenuation mechanism found in B. subtilis, but also by a coupled transcription-translation attenuation mechanism and by acting as a translational repressor. PyrR illustrates the concept that transcriptional attenuation is a much more widespread and mechanistically versatile mechanism for the regulation of gene expression in bacteria than is generally recognized.    We report the development of a series of plasmid vectors for the construction of fusions to mutants of the intrinsically fluorescent green fluorescent protein, GFPmut1 (Cormack et al., 1996. Gene 173, 33-38) and GFPuv (Crameri et al., 1996. Nature Biotechnology 14, 315-319). Both N- and C-terminal fusions can be produced, and their expression can be finely controlled from the inducible Pxyl promoter following double crossover integration into the amyE locus of the Bacillus subtilis chromosome. Other vectors designed for single crossover insertion into the chromosome allow downstream genes to be placed under inducible control. We also show that fusions to GFPmut1 and GFPuv can be co-localized within the cell by virtue of their different excitation spectra.    Using a combination of computer methods for iterative database searches and multiple sequence alignment, we show that protein sequences related to the AAA family of ATPases are far more prevalent than reported previously. Among these are regulatory components of Lon and Clp proteases, proteins involved in DNA replication, recombination, and restriction (including subunits of the origin recognition complex, replication factor C proteins, MCM DNA-licensing factors and the bacterial DnaA, RuvB, and McrB proteins), prokaryotic NtrC-related transcription regulators, the Bacillus sporulation protein SpoVJ, Mg2+, and Co2+ chelatases, the Halobacterium GvpN gas vesicle synthesis protein, dynein motor proteins, TorsinA, and Rubisco activase. Alignment of these sequences, in light of the structures of the clamp loader delta&apos; subunit of Escherichia coli DNA polymerase III and the hexamerization component of N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive fusion protein, provides structural and mechanistic insights into these proteins, collectively designated the AAA+ class. Whole-genome analysis indicates that this class is ancient and has undergone considerable functional divergence prior to the emergence of the major divisions of life. These proteins often perform chaperone-like functions that assist in the assembly, operation, or disassembly of protein complexes. The hexameric architecture often associated with this class can provide a hole through which DNA or RNA can be thread; this may be important for assembly or remodeling of DNA-protein complexes.    Shigella flexneri is a gram-negative bacterium that causes diarrhea and dysentery by invasion and spread through the colonic epithelium. Bacteria spread by assembling actin and other cytoskeletal proteins of the host into &quot;actin tails&quot; at the bacterial pole; actin tail assembly provides the force required to move bacteria through the cell cytoplasm and into adjacent cells. The 120-kDa S. flexneri outer membrane protein IcsA is essential for actin assembly. IcsA is anchored in the outer membrane by a carboxy-terminal domain (the beta domain), such that the amino-terminal 706 amino acid residues (the alpha domain) are exposed on the exterior of the bacillus. The alpha domain is therefore likely to contain the domains that are important to interactions with host factors. We identify and characterize a domain of IcsA within the alpha domain that bears significant sequence similarity to two repeated domains of rickettsial OmpA, which has been implicated in rickettsial actin tail formation. Strains of S. flexneri and Escherichia coli that carry derivatives of IcsA containing deletions within this domain display loss of actin recruitment and increased accessibility to IcsA-specific antibody on the surface of intracytoplasmic bacteria. However, site-directed mutagenesis of charged residues within this domain results in actin assembly that is indistinguishable from that of the wild type, and in vitro competition of a polypeptide of this domain fused to glutathione S-transferase did not alter the motility of the wild-type construct. Taken together, our data suggest that the rickettsial homology domain of IcsA is required for the proper conformation of IcsA and that its disruption leads to loss of interactions of other IcsA domains within the amino terminus with host cytoskeletal proteins.    We report the use of a fusion to the green fluorescent protein to visualize the assembly of the morphogenetic protein SpoIVA around the developing forespore during the process of sporulation in the bacterium Bacillus subtilis. Using a deconvolution algorithm to process digitally-collected optical sections, we show that SpoIVA, which is synthesized in the mother cell chamber of the sporangium, assembled into a spherical shell around the outer surface of the forespore. Time-lapse fluorescence microscopy showed that this assembly process commenced at the time of polar division and seemed to continue after engulfment of the forespore was complete. SpoIVA remained present throughout the late stages of morphogenesis and was present as a component of the fully mature spore. Evidence indicates that assembly of SpoIVA depended on the extreme C-terminal region of the protein and an additional region that directly or indirectly facilitated interaction among SpoIVA molecules. The N- and C-terminal regions of SpoIVA, including the extreme C terminus, are highly similar to the corresponding regions of the homologous protein from the distantly related endospore-forming bacterium Clostridium acetobutylicum, attesting to their importance in the function of the protein. Finally, we show that proper localization of SpoIVA required the expression of one or more genes which, like spoIVA, are under the control of the mother cell transcription factor sigmaE. One such gene was spoVM, whose product was required for efficient targeting of SpoIVA to the outer surface of the forespore.    We have isolated the gene encoding the neopullulanase enzyme from Bacillus polymyxa CECT 155. It consists of an open reading frame of 1545 bp that could code for a protein of 515 amino acids. This open reading frame was expressed in Bacillus subtilis and the corresponding transformants produced extracellular neopullulanase. The neopullulanase gene was also expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae placing it under the control of the yeast actin gene (ACT1) promoter. Clones containing the intact neopullulanase gene, including its own bacterial signal sequence, gave rise to the synthesis of active, but intracellular, enzyme by S. cerevisiae transformants. When sequences specifying the signal sequence and leader region of the yeast mating pheromone alpha-factor (MF alpha 1) were fused upstream of the gene encoding the neopullulanase enzyme, the enzyme was secreted by S. cerevisiae. The secreted protein presented the same biochemical properties and the same apparent molecular mass as the Bacillus polymyxa original enzyme. The predicted amino acid sequence of the neopullulanase protein contained sequence motifs conserved among amylolytic enzymes. Northern blot analysis indicated that the transcription of the neopullulanase gene in B. polymyxa was induced by the presence of the substrate, pullulan, in the culture, and was repressed by glucose.    The malp gene of Mycoplasma fermentans is shown to occur in single copy but to encode two discrete translated forms of lipid-modified surface protein that can be differentially expressed on isolates within this species: MALP-2, a 14-amino-acid (2-kDa) lipopeptide with potent macrophage-stimulatory activity (P. F. Muhlradt, M. Kiess, H. Meyer, R. Sussmuth, and G. Jung, J. Exp. Med. 185:1951-1958, 1997), and MALP-404, an abundant, full-length (404-amino-acid) surface lipoprotein of 41 kDa, previously designated P41 (K. S. Wise, M. F. Kim, P. M. Theiss, and S.-C. Lo, Infect. Immun. 61:3327-3333, 1993). The sequences, transcripts, and translation products of malp were compared between clonal isolates of strains PG18 (known to express P41) and II-29/1 (known to express high levels of MALP-2). Despite conserved malp DNA sequences containing full-length open reading frames and expression of full-length monocistronic transcripts in both isolates, Western blotting using a monoclonal antibody (MAb) to the N-terminal MALP-2 peptide revealed marked differences in the protein products expressed. Whereas PG18 expressed abundant MALP-404 with detectable MALP-2, II-29/1 revealed no MALP-404 even in samples containing a large comparative excess of MALP-2. Colony immunoblots with the MAb showed uniform surface expression of MALP-2 in II-29/1 populations. A second MAb to an epitope of MALP-404 outside the MALP-2 sequence predictably failed to stain II-29/1 colonies but uniformly stained PG18 populations. Collectively, these results provide evidence for novel posttranscriptional (probably posttranslational) processing pathways leading to differential intraspecies expression of a major lipoprotein, and a potent macrophage-activating lipopeptide, on the surface of M. fermentans. In the course of this study, a striking conserved motif (consensus, TD-G--DDKSFNQSAWE--), designated SLA, was identified in MALP-404; this motif is also distributed among selected lipoproteins and species from diverse bacterial genera, including Bacillus, Borrelia, Listeria, Mycoplasma, and Treponema. In addition, malp was shown to flank a chromosomal polymorphism. In eight isolates of M. fermentans examined, malp occurred upstream of an operon encoding the phase-variable P78 ABC transporter; but, in three of these isolates, a newly discovered insertion sequence, IS1630 (of the IS30 class), was located between these genes.    A mechanism for regulating gene expression at the level of transcription utilizes an antagonist of the sigma transcription factor known as the anti-sigma (anti-sigma) factor. The cytoplasmic class of anti-sigma factors has been well characterized. The class includes AsiA form bacteriophage T4, which inhibits Escherichia coli sigma 70; FlgM, present in both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, which inhibits the flagella sigma factor sigma 28; SpoIIAB, which inhibits the sporulation-specific sigma factor, sigma F and sigma G, of Bacillus subtilis; RbsW of B. subtilis, which inhibits stress response sigma factor sigma B; and DnaK, a general regulator of the heat shock response, which in bacteria inhibits the heat shock sigma factor sigma 32. In addition to this class of well-characterized cytoplasmic anti-sigma factors, a new class of homologous, inner-membrane-bound anti-sigma factors has recently been discovered in a variety of eubacteria. This new class of anti-sigma factors regulates the expression of so-called extracytoplasmic functions, and hence is known as the ECF subfamily of anti-sigma factors. The range of cell processes regulated by anti-sigma factors is highly varied and includes bacteriophage phage growth, sporulation, stress response, flagellar biosynthesis, pigment production, ion transport, and virulence.    There was a long-held belief that the gram-positive soil bacterium Bacillus subtilis is a strict aerobe. But recent studies have shown that B. subtilis will grow anaerobically, either by using nitrate or nitrite as a terminal electron acceptor, or by fermentation. How B. subtilis alters its metabolic activity according to the availability of oxygen and alternative electron acceptors is but one focus of study. A two-component signal transduction system composed of a sensor kinase, ResE, and a response regulator, ResD, occupies an early stage in the regulatory pathway governing anaerobic respiration. One of the essential roles of ResD and ResE in anaerobic gene regulation is induction of fnr transcription upon oxygen limitation. FNR is a transcriptional activator for anaerobically induced genes, including those for respiratory nitrate reductase, narGHJI.B. subtilis has two distinct nitrate reductases, one for the assimilation of nitrate nitrogen and the other for nitrate respiration. In contrast, one nitrite reductase functions both in nitrite nitrogen assimilation and nitrite respiration. Unlike many anaerobes, which use pyruvate formate lyase, B. subtilis can carry out fermentation in the absence of external electron acceptors wherein pyruvate dehydrogenase is utilized to metabolize pyruvate.    Competence is a physiological state, distinct from sporulation and vegetative growth, that enables cells to bind and internalize transforming DNA. The transcriptional regulator ComK drives the development of competence in Bacillus subtilis. ComK is directly required for its own transcription as well as for the transcription of the genes that encode DNA transport proteins. When ComK is sequestered by binding to a complex of the proteins MecA and ClpC, the positive feedback loop leading to ComK synthesis is interrupted. The small protein ComS, produced as a result of signaling by a quorum-sensing two-component regulatory pathway, triggers the release of ComK from the complex, enabling comK transcription to occur. We show here, based on in vivo and in vitro experiments, that ComK accumulation is also regulated by proteolysis and that binding to MecA targets ComK for degradation by the ClpP protease in association with ClpC. The release of ComK from binding by MecA and ClpC, which occurs when ComS is synthesized, protects ComK from proteolysis. Following this release, the rates of MecA and ComS degradation by ClpCP are increased in our in vitro system. In this novel system, MecA serves to recruit ComK to the ClpCP protease and connects ComK degradation to the quorum-sensing signal-transduction pathway, thereby regulating a key developmental process. This is the first regulated degradation system in which a specific targeting molecule serves such a function.    Bacterial chromosome replication is tightly regulated at the initiation stage to coordinate with mass increase. Together with chromosome partition at cell division, this regulation mechanism ensures the proper number of chromosomes in daughter cells at any growth rate. Therefore, elucidation of this regulation mechanism is important for understanding the bacterial cell cycle. Despite much effort in Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis for many years, the mechanism remains to be completely elucidated. In E. coli, it is proposed that a critical amount of DnaA protein determines the time of initiation of replication in the cell cycle. Our study strongly suggested that this might not be the case in B. subtilis. Recently, remarkable progress has been made in bacterial cytology. The new techniques enable us to examine the subcellular location of proteins of interest and DNA regions of the chromosome (for example, the replication origin) and, therefore, to determine directly when in the cell division cycle and where within the cell initiation of chromosome replication takes place. Using the techniques, we detected the initiation complex by examining subcellular location of several Dna-initiation proteins in B. subtilis. Based on our new findings, we propose a novel model for regulation of the time of initiation of chromosome replication in the cell cycle. Copyright 1999 Academic Press.    Transcription of the Bacillus subtilis iol divergon is negatively regulated by a repressor encoded by iolR, which belongs to the DeoR family of bacterial regulators. Gel retardation analysis involving the IolR protein synthesized in Escherichia coli revealed that IolR bound specifically and independently to each of the iol and iolRS promoter regions, with higher affinity to iol. DNase I footprinting revealed that IolR affected DNase I sensitivity either in the iol promoter region between nucleotides -46 and +51 or in iolRS between -79 and -2 (+1 is the transcription initiation nucleotide of both iol and iolRS), indicating its interaction with the extended regions of the iol and iolRS promoters. Deletion analysis indicated that the iol region between -23 and +21 is involved mainly in IolR binding and negative regulation, while the iolRS region between -70 and -44 comprises at least part of the cis-acting sequences for IolR binding and negative regulation. Sequence examination of the extended regions revealed that a tandem direct repeat consisting of two relatively conserved 11-mer sequences, WRAYCAADARD (where D is A, G or T; R is A or G; W is A or T; and Y is C or T), found in each of the iol and iolRS regions might be a determinant sequence for the IolR-DNA interaction. Actual involvement of the direct repeats in the IolR-DNA interaction was shown by the deficiency of IolR-binding and negative regulation that was caused by substitution of the conserved bases within the conserved sequences. These results imply a unique mode of interaction of IolR with the target DNA. Copyright 1998 Academic Press.    Polyhydroxyalkanoic acids (PHA) are carbon and energy storage polymers that accumulate in inclusion bodies in many bacteria and archaea in response to environmental conditions. This work presents the results of a study of PHA inclusion body-associated proteins and an analysis of their coding region in Bacillus megaterium 11561. A 7, 917-bp fragment of DNA was cloned and shown to carry a 4,104-bp cluster of 5 pha genes, phaP, -Q, -R, -B, and -C. The phaP and -Q genes were shown to be transcribed in one orientation, each from a separate promoter, while immediately upstream, phaR, -B, and -C were divergently transcribed as a tricistronic operon. Transfer of this gene cluster to Escherichia coli and to a PhaC- mutant of Pseudomonas putida gave a Pha+ phenotype in both strains. Translational fusions to the green fluorescent protein localized PhaP and PhaC to the PHA inclusion bodies in living cells. The data presented are consistent with the hypothesis that the extremely hydrophilic protein PhaP is a storage protein and suggests that PHA inclusion bodies are not only a source of carbon, energy, and reducing equivalents but are also a source of amino acids.    In Bacillus subtilis, the secretion of extracellular proteins strongly increases upon transition from exponential growth to the stationary growth phase. It is not known whether the amounts of some or all components of the protein translocation apparatus are concomitantly increased in relation to the increased export activity. In this study, we analyzed the transcriptional organization and temporal expression of the secA gene, encoding a central component of the B. subtilis preprotein translocase. We found that secA and the downstream gene (prfB) constitute an operon that is transcribed from a vegetative (sigmaA-dependent) promoter located upstream of secA. Furthermore, using different independent methods, we found that secA expression occurred mainly in the exponential growth phase, reaching a maximal value almost precisely at the transition from exponential growth to the stationary growth phase. Following to this maximum, the de novo transcription of secA sharply decreased to a low basal level. Since at the time of maximal secA transcription the secretion activity of B. subtilis strongly increases, our results clearly demonstrate that the expression of at least one of the central components of the B. subtilis protein export apparatus is adapted to the increased demand for protein secretion. Possible mechanistic consequences are discussed.    We have identified a locus essential for galacturonate utilization in Bacillus subtilis. Genes homologous to Escherichia coli and Erwinia chrysanthemi glucuronate and galacturonate metabolic genes were found in a cluster consisting of 10 open reading frames (ORFs) in the B. subtilis chromosome. A mutant of B. subtilis containing a replacement of the second and third ORFs was unable to grow with galacturonate as its primary carbon source. Galacturonate induced expression from a sigmaA-dependent promoter, exuP1, located upstream from the first ORF. The eighth ORF in this cluster (the exu locus) encodes a LacI and GalR homolog that negatively regulated expression from exuP1. A 26-bp inverted repeat sequence centered 15 bp downstream from the exuP1 start point of transcription acted in cis to negatively regulate expression from exuP1 under noninducing conditions. Expression from the exuP1 promoter was repressed by high levels of glucose, which is probably mediated by CcpA (catabolite control protein A). A sigmaE-dependent promoter, exuP2, was localized between the second and third ORFs and was active during sporulation.    Through the analysis of a non-motile mutant of Listeria monocytogenes, we identified and characterized a locus containing the cheR, motA and motB genes. These three genes are homologous to the cheR, and motA/B genes of Bacillus subtilis which in this organism are 954 kb apart. The gene organization in Listeria is also not similar either to that of Escherichia coli in which cheR and motAB are 5.9 kb apart. CheR and motA/B, as previously reported for flaA, the flagellin gene, are thermoregulated with a higher expression at 25 degrees C and low expression at 37 degrees C. In a delta prfA strain, motA expression was derepressed at 37 degrees C, suggesting that PrfA, the transcriptional activator of virulence genes, downregulates motility genes in Listeria at 37 degrees C.    Listeria monocytogenes requires listeriolysin O (LLO) and ActA, the products of hly and actA, respectively, to establish a productive intracellular infection. LLO is essential for vacuolar lysis and entry into the cytosol, while ActA is required for bacterial spread to adjacent cells. We have used a transcriptional reporter gene system to compare the expression of actA and hly during intracellular growth to that during growth in broth cultures. The hly and actA genes were transcriptionally fused to Escherichia coli lacZ and Bacillus pumilus cat-86 (cat), and the fusions were integrated in single copies into the L. monocytogenes chromosome. A chloramphenicol resistance assay indicated that the hly fusion but not the actA fusion was significantly activated in Luria-Bertani (LB) broth, and this finding correlated with LLO and ActA levels detectable in broth cultures. Quantitation of promoter activity on the basis of beta-galactosidase activity revealed up to 10-fold-higher level of expression of the hly fusion relative to the actA fusion in LB broth. In contrast, both fusions were active in the cytosol of J774 cells, and the activity of the actA fusion was approximately 3-fold higher than that of the hly fusion under these conditions. However, quantitative immunoprecipitation of ActA and LLO from infected J774 cells demonstrated approximately 70-fold more cytosolic ActA than cytosolic LLO. Finally, in comparison to induction in broth cultures, actA was highly induced (226-fold) and hly was moderately induced (20-fold) in J774 cells. Collectively, these results indicate that actA and hly are differentially regulated in response to the growth environment and that both genes are preferentially expressed during intracellular growth. Further, while the lower level of production of ActA than of LLO in broth can be accounted for by transcriptional regulation, the relative abundance of intracellular ActA compared to that of intracellular LLO is a function of additional, possibly host-mediated, factors.    Eleven small, acid-soluble proteins (SASP) which are present in spores but not in growing cells of Bacillus subtilis were identified by sequence analysis of proteins separated by acrylamide gel electrophoresis of acid extracts from spores which lack the three major SASP (alpha, beta, and gamma). Six of these proteins are encoded by open reading frames identified previously or by analysis of the complete sequence of the B. subtilis genome, including two minor alpha/beta-type SASP (SspC and SspD) and a putative spore coat protein (CotK). Five proteins are encoded by short open reading frames that were not identified as coding regions in the analysis of the complete B. subtilis genomic sequence. Studies of the regulation of two of the latter genes, termed sspG and sspJ, showed that both are expressed only in sporulation. The sspG gene is transcribed in the mother cell compartment by RNA polymerase with the mother cell-specific sigma factor for RNA polymerase, sigmaK, and is cotranscribed with a downstream gene, yurS; sspG transcription also requires the DNA binding protein GerE. In contrast, sspJ is transcribed in the forespore compartment by RNA polymerase with the forespore-specific sigmaG and appears to give a monocistronic transcript. A mutation eliminating SspG had no effect on sporulation or spore properties, while loss of SspJ caused a slight decrease in the rate of spore outgrowth in an otherwise wild-type background.    The Bacillus subtilis clpC operon is regulated by two stress induction pathways relying on either sigmaB or a class III stress induction mechanism acting at a sigmaA-like promoter. When the clpC operon was placed under the control of the isopropyl-beta-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG)-inducible Pspac promoter, dramatic repression of the natural clpC promoters fused to a lacZ reporter gene was noticed after IPTG induction. This result strongly indicated negative regulation of the clpC operon by one of its gene products. Indeed, the negative regulator could be identified which is encoded by the first gene of the clpC operon, ctsR, containing a predicted helix-turn-helix DNA-binding motif. Deletion of ctsR abolished the negative regulation and resulted in high expression of both the clpC operon and the clpP gene under nonstressed conditions. Nevertheless, a further increase in clpC and clpP mRNA levels was observed after heat shock, even in the absence of sigmaB, suggesting a second induction mechanism at the vegetative promoter. Two-dimensional gel analysis and mRNA studies showed that the expression of other class III stress genes was at least partially influenced by the ctsR deletion. Studies with different clpC promoter fragments either fused to the reporter gene bgaB or used in gel mobility shift experiments with the purified CtsR protein revealed a possible target region where the repressor seemed to bind in vivo and in vitro. Our data demonstrate that the CtsR protein acts as a global repressor of the clpC operon, as well as other class III heat shock genes, by preventing unstressed transcription from either the sigmaB- or sigmaA-dependent promoter and might be inactivated or dissociate under inducing stress conditions.    During a search by computer-aided inspection of two-dimensional (2D) protein gels for sigmaB-dependent general stress proteins exhibiting atypical induction profiles, a protein initially called Hst23 was identified as a product of the yvyD gene of Bacillus subtilis. In addition to the typical sigmaB-dependent, stress- and starvation-inducible pattern, yvyD is also induced in response to amino acid depletion. By primer extension of RNA isolated from the wild-type strain and appropriate mutants carrying mutations in the sigB and/or spo0H gene, two promoters were mapped upstream of the yvyD gene. The sigmaB-dependent promoter drives expression of yvyD under stress conditions and after glucose starvation, whereas a sigmaH-dependent promoter is responsible for yvyD transcription following amino acid limitation. Analysis of Northern blots revealed that yvyD is transcribed monocistronically and confirmed the conclusions drawn from the primer extension experiments. The analysis of the protein synthesis pattern in amino acid-starved wild-type and relA mutant cells showed that the YvyD protein is not synthesized in the relA mutant background. It was concluded that the stringent response plays a role in the activation of sigmaH. The yvyD gene product is homologous to a protein which might modify the activity of sigma54 in gram-negative bacteria. The expression of a sigmaL-dependent (sigmaL is the equivalent of sigma54 in B. subtilis) levD-lacZ fusion is upregulated twofold in a yvyD mutant. This indicates that the yvyD gene product, being a member of both the sigmaB and sigmaH regulons, might negatively regulate the activity of the sigmaL regulon. We conclude that (i) systematic, computer-aided analysis of 2D protein gels is appropriate for the identification of genes regulated by multiple transcription factors and that (ii) YvyD might form a junction between the sigmaB and sigmaH regulons on one side and the sigmaL regulon on the other.    In Bacillus subtilis, carbon catabolite repression (CCR) of many genes is mediated at cis-acting carbon repression elements (cre) by the catabolite repressor protein CcpA. Mutations in transcription-repair coupling factor (mfd) partially relieve CCR at cre sites located downstream of transcriptional start sites by abolishing the Mfd-mediated displacement of RNA polymerase stalled at cre sites which act as transcriptional roadblocks. Although the acsA cre is centered 44.5 bp downstream of the acsA transcriptional start site, CCR of acsA expression is not affected by an mfd mutation. When the acsA cre is centered 161.5 bp downstream of the transcriptional start site for the unregulated tms promoter, CCR is partially relieved by the mfd mutation. Since CCR mediated at an acsA cre centered 44.5 bp downstream of the tms start site is not affected by the mfd mutation, the inability of Mfd to modulate CCR of acsA expression most likely results from the location of the acsA cre. Higher levels of CCR were found to occur at cre sites flanked by A+T-rich sequences than at cre sites bordered by G and C nucleotides. This suggests that nucleotides adjacent to the proposed 14-bp cre consensus sequence participate in the formation of the CcpA catabolite repression complex at cre sites. Examination of CCR of acsA expression revealed that this regulation required the Crh and seryl-phosphorylated form of the HPr proteins but not glucose kinase.    Under aerobic conditions Bacillus subtilis utilizes a branched electron transport chain comprising various cytochromes and terminal oxidases. At present there is evidence for three types of terminal oxidases in B. subtilis: a caa3-, an aa3-, and a bd-type oxidase. We report here the cloning of the structural genes (cydA and cydB) encoding the cytochrome bd complex. Downstream of the structural genes, cydC and cydD are located. These genes encode proteins showing similarity to bacterial ATP-binding cassette (ABC)-type transporters. Analysis of isolated cell membranes showed that inactivation of cydA or deletion of cydABCD resulted in the loss of spectral features associated with cytochrome bd. Gene disruption experiments and complementation analysis showed that the cydC and cydD gene products are required for the expression of a functional cytochrome bd complex. Disruption of the cyd genes had no apparent effect on the growth of cells in broth or defined media. The expression of the cydABCD operon was investigated by Northern blot analysis and by transcriptional and translational cyd-lacZ fusions. Northern blot analysis confirmed that cydABCD is transcribed as a polycistronic message. The operon was found to be expressed maximally under conditions of low oxygen tension.    The arginine deiminase pathway enables Bacillus licheniformis to grow anaerobically on arginine. Both the presence of arginine and anaerobiosis are needed to trigger induction of the pathway. In this study we have cloned and sequenced the arc genes encoding the pathway. They appear clustered in an operon-like structure in the order arcA (arginine deiminase), arcB (ornithine carbamoyltransferase), arcD (putative arginine-ornithine antiporter), arcC (carbamate kinase). It was found that B. licheniformis has an arginine repressor, ArgR, homologous to the B. subtilis arginine repressor AhrC. Mutants affected in argR were isolated. These mutants have lost both repression by arginine of the anabolic ornithine carbamoyltransferase and induction of the arginine deiminase pathway. Electrophoretic band shift experiments and DNase I footprinting revealed that in the presence of arginine, ArgR binds to a site upstream from the arc promoter. The binding site is centered 108 nucleotides upstream from the transcription start point and contains a single Arg box.    Transcription of a new catabolic operon in Bacillus subtilis, involved in the late stages of galacturonic acid utilization, has been studied. The operon consists of four genes: kdgR, encoding the putative regulator protein; kdgK, encoding 2-keto-3-deoxygluconate kinase; kdgA, encoding 2-keto-3-deoxygluconate-6-phosphate aldolase; and kdgT, encoding a transporter. These four genes are organized in one transcriptional unit and map at 198 degrees of the B. subtilis chromosome. Primer extension experiments and Northern blot analysis show that an active sigmaA-dependent promoter precedes kdgR and transcription is terminated at the putative p-independent terminator downstream of kdgT. The operon is negatively regulated by the kdgR and ccpA gene products, which belong to the LacI family of transcription regulators. The expression of the genes in this operon can be induced by galacturonate and strongly repressed when glucose is present in the growth medium. Knockout mutations in genes kdgR and ccpA remove, respectively, the effects of galacturonate and glucose on the transcription of this operon.    To study the functions of the uncharacterized open reading frames identified in the Bacillus subtilis genome, several vectors were constructed to perform insertional mutagenesis in the chromosome. All the pMUTIN plasmids carry a lacZ reporter gene and an inducible Pspac promoter, which is tightly regulated and can be induced about 1000-fold. The integration of a pMUTIN vector into the target gene has three consequences: (1) the target gene is inactivated; (2) lacZ becomes transcriptionally fused to the gene, allowing its expression pattern to be monitored; (3) the Pspac promoter controls the transcription of downstream genes in an IPTG-dependent fashion. This last feature is important because B. subtilis genes are often organized in operons. The potential polar effects generated by the integration of the vectors can be alleviated by addition of IPTG. Also, conditional mutants of essential genes can be obtained by integrating pMUTIN vectors upstream of the target gene. The vectors are currently being used for systematic inactivation of genes without known function within the B. subtilis European consortium. pMUTIN characteristics and the inactivation of eight genes in the resA-serA region of the chromosome are presented.    The expression of the sigB gene of Bacillus subtilis was analysed in response to a mild acid shock. This gene is subject to sigmaB-dependent regulation. It has been found that the expression of sigB is induced as part of the acid-tolerant response. In that respect sigB is similar to the previously described gene gsiB which is also a member of the sigmaB regulon. Through this induction, the sigmaB regulon provides protection against acid shock. Besides its protective role against acid shock, no other general function could be directly associated with the sigmaB regulon. An acidification of the cytoplasmic environment induces synthesis of general stress proteins in B. subtilis.    The rpoA gene, encoding the alpha subunit of RNA polymerase, was isolated from alkaliphilic Bacillus sp. strain C-125 by the PCR method. A 3-kb HindIII fragment containing the complete rpoA gene was cloned and sequenced. The alpha subunit gene was found to encode a protein consisting of 314 amino acid residues with a molecular mass of 34,805 Da. Compared with the amino acid sequences of other known eubacterial RNA polymerase alpha subunits, the gene has 84% identity to that of B. subtilis, while showing 48% and 47% identity to that of Streptomyces coelicolor and Escherichia coli, respectively. Six conserved regions, which are observed in the case of other eubacteria, were found in the RNA polymerase alpha subunit of this strain. Five of them are located in the N-terminal domain involved in assembly of the core enzyme, while one is located in the C-terminal domain, which interacts with several transcriptional factors and a specific DNA element. By means of recombinant plasmids, a hexahistidine-tagged derivative of the RNA polymerase alpha subunit of strain C-125 and two deletion derivatives (C- and N-terminal domains) of this protein were overexpressed in E. coli cells and purified to near homogeneity.    A two-component signal transduction system encoded by the yycF and yycG genes is part of an operon containing three genes, yycH, yycI, and yycJ, with no known function and a gene, yycK, coding for an HtrA-like protease. This operon was transcribed during growth, and its transcription shut down as the cells approached stationary phase. This decreased transcription was not Spo0A dependent. The HtrA protease gene was separately controlled during sporulation from a sigmaG promoter. Studies using insertional inactivation plasmids revealed that neither yycF nor yycG could be inactivated, whereas the other genes were inactivated without loss of viability. A temperature-sensitive YycF response regulator mutant was isolated and shown to have an H215P mutation in a putative DNA-binding domain which is closely related to the OmpR family of response regulators. At the nonpermissive temperature, cultures of the mutant strain stopped growth within 30 min, and this was followed by a decrease in optical density. Microscopically, many of the cells appeared to retain their structure while being empty of their contents. The essential processes regulated by this two-component system remain unknown. A search of the genome databases revealed YycF, YycG, and YycJ homologues encoded by three linked genes in Streptococcus pyogenes. The high level of identity of these proteins (71% for YycF) suggests that this system may play a similar role in gram-positive pathogens.    Bacillus subtilis cytochrome c oxidase caa3 is encoded by the ctaCDEF genes at the ctaABCDEF locus, with the ctaBCDEF genes organized as an operon-like unit. A dyad symmetry sequence and a catabolite response element homolog can be recognized in the 240-bp intercistronic region between ctaB and ctaC. ctaB&apos;-lacZ and ctaBCD&apos;-lacZ transcriptional fusions integrated at the native locus were used to study catabolite effects on transcription of the ctaB and ctaCDEF genes. In Schaeffer&apos;s medium lacking glucose, ctaBCD&apos;-lacZ was expressed at a very low level during the exponential phase, and expression increased about 30-fold 2 h after entry into the stationary phase. In the presence of 0.5% glucose, ctaBCD&apos;-lacZ expression was totally repressed. In contrast to ctaBCD&apos;-lacZ, ctaB&apos;-lacZ was constitutively expressed regardless of carbon source. The ctaCDEF genes were separated from ctaB by insertion of plasmids carrying selectable markers in such a way that the ctaCDEF and ctaB transcription units remained intact. Enzymatic assays of caa3 with these constructs, showed that ctaCDEF was not expressed independently of ctaB. Also, when a &apos;ctaB-ctaC&apos;-lacZ fusion (containing the ctaB-ctaC intercistronic region) was placed at a remote nonessential locus, beta-galactosidase activity could not be detected. The absence of a promoter in the ctaB-ctaC intercistronic space also was indicated by the inability to detect ctaC-specific transcripts with RNase protection assays, primer extension, and rapid amplification of 5&apos; cDNA ends. Direct mRNA measurements showed that, in the presence of 0.5% glucose, ctaBCDEF transcripts terminated at the 3&apos; end of the putative stem-loop structure and the distal portion was down-regulated. A possible mechanism for ctaCDEF gene regulation is suggested. Catabolite repression of ctaBCD&apos;-lacZ was partly dependent on CcpA but was independent of HPr. The expression of ctaBCDEF also appears to require the strC, ctaA, and resD-resE gene products.    Sequencing of the vicinity of the staphylococcal pbp2 gene and transcriptional analysis by primer extension and promoter fusions were used to show that pbp2 is part of an operon that also includes a gene with high homology to prfA of Bacillus subtilis. Two distinct promoters were identified directing transcription of pbp2 either alone or together with prfA. It was recently reported that transposon inactivation of pbp2 causes a reduction in methicillin resistance, but complementation experiments were not fully successful. We now show that introduction of the intact pbp2 gene with its two newly identified promoters into the chromosome of the transposon mutant resulted in the full recovery of high-level methicillin resistance.    The commercial surface plasmon resonance (SPR) biosensors, BIACORE, have been used to investigate the molecular details of macromolecular interactions at prokaryotic promoter-operators. For the Escherichia coli methionine repressor, MetJ, we have quantitated the interaction of the protein with synthetic and natural operator sites and shown that the SPR response is directly related to the stoichiometry of the complexes being formed. The utility of a continuous flow system has also been exploited to investigate transcription from an immobilised promoter-operator fragment; with transcripts collected and subsequently characterised by RT-PCR. This technique has enabled us to investigate how repressor binding affects (i) the interaction of the RNA polymerase (RNAP) with the promoter and (ii) the ability of RNAP to initiate transcription. Remarkably, the repression complex appears to stabilise binding of RNAP, whilst having the expected effects on the levels of transcripts produced. This may well be a general mechanism allowing rapid transcription initiation to occur as soon as the repression complex dissociates. These techniques have also been used to examine protein-DNA interactions in the E. coli and Bacillus subtilis arginine repressor systems. The repressors are the products of the argR and ahrC genes, respectively. Both proteins form hexamers in rapid equilibrium with smaller subunits believed to be trimers. There are three types of operator in these systems, autoregulatory, biosynthetic and catabolic (B. subtilis only). Sensorgrams show that each protein recognises the three types of immobilised operator differently and that binding is stimulated over 100-fold by the presence of L-arginine.    Free energy values of mRNA tertiary structures around stop codons were systematically calculated to surmise the hairpin-forming potential for all genes in each of the 16 complete prokaryote genomes. Instead of trying to detect each individual hairpin, we averaged the free energy values around the stop codons over the entire genome to predict how extensively the organism relies on hairpin formation in the process of transcription termination. The free energy values of Escherichia coli K-12 shows a sharp drop, as expected, at 30 bp downstream of the stop codon, presumably due to hairpin-forming sequences. Similar drops are observed for Haemophilus influenzae Rd, Bacillus subtilis and Chlamydia trachomatis, suggesting that these organisms also form hairpins at their transcription termination sites. On the other hand, 12 other prokaryotes- Mycoplasma genitalium, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Synechocystis PCC6803, Helicobacter pylori, Borrelia burgdorferi, Methanococcus jannaschii, Archaeoglobus fulgidus, Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum, Aquifex aeolicus, Pyrococcus horikoshii, Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Treponema pallidum -show no apparent decrease in free energy value at the corresponding regions. This result suggests that these prokaryotes, or at least some of them, may never form hairpins at their transcription termination sites.    The activity of the developmental transcription factor sigmaF in the spore-forming bacterium Bacillus subtilis is controlled by SpoIIAB, which sequesters sigmaF in an inactive complex. sigmaF is released from the SpoIIAB-sigmaF complex by the action of SpoIIAA, which triggers the dissociation of the complex. SpoIIAB is also a protein kinase that phosphorylates SpoIIAA on serine residue 58 (S58). This phosphorylation inactivates SpoIIAA and thus indirectly prevents the activation of sigmaF. Here, we report the identification of a patch of amino acid residues located in the vicinity of the adenosine nucleotide binding pocket of SpoIIAB that is required for the phosphorylation of SpoIIAA. A lysine substitution (E104K) at one of these residues (Glu104) markedly impaired the capacity of SpoIIAB to phosphorylate SpoIIAA in vitro as well as during sporulation. Kinetic analysis and evidence from the construction of alanine substitution mutants indicates that the side-chains of these amino acids could be contact sites for the SpoIIAA substrate during the phosphorylation reaction. Importantly, E104K and other kinase mutants blocked the activation of sigmaF during sporulation. This is paradoxical, because a mutant of SpoIIAA (S58A) that cannot be phosphorylated is known to cause higher than normal levels of sigmaF activity during sporulation. In resolution of this paradox, we present biochemical evidence indicating that SpoIIAA directly attacks the SpoIIAB-sigmaF complex and that SpoIIAA is phosphorylated as a result of this reaction. Consistent with this idea, mutations impairing kinase function of SpoIIAB were found to be epistatic to a mutation causing the S58A substitution in SpoIIAA; that is, cells producing mutant forms of both proteins were blocked in the activation of sigmaF. We conclude that phosphorylation of SpoIIAA plays a dual role in the sigmaF pathway, and that the kinase function of SpoIIAB is required for the activation as well as the inhibition of sigmaF during sporulation. Copyright 1998 Academic Press    The activity of the developmental transcription factor sigmaF in Bacillus subtilis is governed by a switch involving the dual function protein SpoIIAB. SpoIIAB is an antisigma factor that forms complexes with sigmaF and with an alternative partner protein SpoIIAA. SpoIIAB is also a protein kinase that can inactivate SpoIIAA by phosphorylating it on a serine residue. We sought to identify amino acids in SpoIIAB that are involved in the formation of the SpoIIAB-SpoIIAA complex by screening for mutants that were defective in the activation of sigmaF. This genetic screen, in combination with biochemical analysis and the construction of loss-of-side-chain (alanine substitution) mutants, led to the identification of amino acid side-chains in the N-terminal region of SpoIIAB that could contact SpoIIAA. Unexpectedly, the same amino acid side-chains (R20 and N50) that appear to touch SpoIIAA are required for binding to, and may represent sites of contact with, sigmaF. We propose that the N-terminal region of SpoIIAB forms a binding surface that is responsible for the formation of both the SpoIIAB-SpoIIAA and the SpoIIAB-sigmaF complexes, and that in some cases the same amino acid side-chains contact both partner proteins. N50 is also the defining residue of a region of amino acid sequence homology known as the N-box that is shared by SpoIIAB and related serine protein kinases, as well as by members of a mechanistically dissimilar family of protein kinases that undergo autophosphorylation at a histidine residue. We discuss the implications of this finding for the mechanism of histidine autophosphorylation. Copyright 1998 Academic Press    Two closely related genes of thermostable Bac. brevis metalloproteases were cloned and expressed in Bac. subtilis cells. Their restriction maps and directions of transcription were determined. Thermostability and thermal optimum of proteolytic activity of cloned gene products are significantly lower than those of native enzymes. The authors believe that alteration of the enzymes&apos; characteristics may be due to uncorrected folding of thermostable protein in case of its expression in mesophilic bacterial strains.    Transcriptional activation of the Bacillus subtilis ackA gene, encoding acetate kinase, was previously shown to require catabolite control protein A (CcpA) and sequences upstream of the ackA promoter. CcpA, which is responsible for catabolite repression of a number of secondary carbon source utilization genes in B. subtilis and other gram-positive bacteria, recognizes a cis-acting consensus sequence, designated cre (catabolite response element), generally located within or downstream of the promoter of the repressed gene. Two sites resembling this sequence are centered at positions -116.5 and -56.5 of the ackA promoter and have been termed cre1 and cre2, respectively. Synthesis of acetate kinase, which is involved in the conversion of acetyl coenzyme A to acetate, is induced when cells are grown in the presence of an easily metabolized carbon source such as glucose. In this study, cre2, the site closer to the promoter, and the region upstream of cre2 were shown to be indispensable for CcpA-dependent transcriptional activation of ackA, whereas cre1 was not required. In addition, insertion of 5 bp between cre2 and the promoter disrupted activation, while 10 bp was tolerated, suggesting face-of-the-helix dependence of the position of cre2 and/or upstream sequences. DNase footprinting experiments demonstrated binding of CcpA in vitro to cre2 but not cre1, consistent with the genetic data. Activation of ackA transcription was blocked in a ptsH1/crh double mutant, suggesting involvement of this pathway in CcpA-mediated transcriptional activation.    Zinc is an essential nutrient for all cells, but remarkably little is known regarding bacterial zinc transport and its regulation. We have identified three of the key components acting to maintain zinc homeostasis in Bacillus subtilis. Zur is a metalloregulatory protein related to the ferric uptake repressor (Fur) family of regulators and is required for the zinc-specific repression of two operons implicated in zinc uptake, yciC and ycdHIyceA. A zur mutant overexpresses the 45-kDa YciC membrane protein, and purified Zur binds specifically, and in a zinc-responsive manner, to an operator site overlapping the yciC control region. A similar operator precedes the ycdH-containing operon, which encodes an ABC transporter. Two lines of evidence suggest that the ycdH operon encodes a high-affinity zinc transporter whereas YciC may function as part of a lower-affinity pathway. First, a ycdH mutant is impaired in growth in low-zinc medium, and this growth defect is exacerbated by the additional presence of a yciC mutation. Second, mutation of ycdH, but not yciC, alters the regulation of both the yciC and ycdH operons such that much higher levels of exogenous zinc are required for repression. We conclude that Zur is a Fur-like repressor that controls the expression of two zinc homeostasis operons in response to zinc. Thus, Fur-like regulators control zinc homeostasis in addition to their previously characterized roles in regulating iron homeostasis, acid tolerance responses, and oxidative stress functions.    In Central America leaf extracts from the Asteraceae Tithonia diversifolia are used externally for the treatment of haematomas and wounds. Therefore, the main sesquiterpene lactones (Sls) of this species growing in Costa Rica, diversifolin (1), diversifolin methyl ether (2), and tirotundin (3), were studied for their anti-inflammatory activity. We determined whether these compounds inhibit cyclooxygenase-I, phospholipase A2, or the transcription factor NF-kappa B. Here we show that these Sls do not influence the enzymes of the arachidonic acid pathway, but inhibit the activation of NF-kappa B. Thereby, the synthesis of inflammatory mediators such as cytokines and chemokines is reduced. Our results indicate that the inhibitory activity of compounds 1-3 is due to alkylation of cysteine residues, which are probably located in the DNA binding domain of NF-kappa B. The Sls were also studied for their antibacterial activity, but only Sl 1 was moderately active against Bacillus subtilis in the agar plate diffusion test.    A novel class of DNA-binding domains has been established from at least sixteen recently identified DNA-binding proteins. The three-dimensional structure of one of these domains, Mrf-2, has been solved using NMR methods. This structure is significantly different from known DNA-binding domain structures. The mechanism of DNA recognition by this motif has been suggested based on conserved residues, surface electrostatic potentials and chemical shift changes. This new DNA-binding motif shares structural homology with T4 RNase H, E. coli endonuclease III and Bacillus subtilis DNA polymerase I. The structural homology suggests a mechanism for substrate recognition by these enzymes.    The osmosensitivity presented by spo0A and degU null mutant strains of Bacillus subtilis pointed to their protein products as essential regulators for the osmotic response. This was further investigated by analyzing their transcription activity. The results showed that both spo0A-lacZ and degSU-lacZ were induced by the hypertonic medium. The actual phosphorylation state of these proteins was also analyzed by the bias of two reporter gene promoters activity (abrB-lacZ and degQ-lacZ). The absence of repression of abrB in hypertonic conditions suggested that Spo0A was not phosphorylated while the derepression of degQ promoter suggested that DegU-P was formed. These results were in accordance with the observed absence of sporulation in hyperosmotic media and semi-constitutive osmotolerance of degUh mutant strains known to retain phosphorylated DegU. The failure to secrete proteases and to sporulate in hypertonic media suggested that Spo0A acts through abrB regulation in the prevention of alternate responses. The role of DegU-P as positive regulator of the osmotic response seems to be settled and is discussed.    The temperature-sensitive secA341 mutation of Bacillus subtilis affects sporulation and sporulation-associated events as well as protein secretion and cell septation. With lacZ or bgaB fusion genes, we examined the expression of the early sporulation genes in the mutant strain. Transcriptional expression of delta H dependent kinA, spo0A (Ps), phrC, spoVG, and citG (p2) genes was blocked by the secA341 mutation at 37 degrees C. On the other hand, neither repression of the abrB gene nor induction of the spoH (delta H) gene was affected. Active RNA polymerase containing delta H was, however, found to be produced in the mutant cells. Expression of the phosphorylated Spo0A dependent spoIIG operon was also blocked. Thus the secA341 mutation blocks some step(s) or factor(s) required for delta H-dependent transcription in vivo.    The Streptomyces ghanaensis plasmid pSG5 is self-transmissible but does not form the growth-retardation zones (pocks) normally characteristic of the Streptomyces plasmid-transfer process. The complete nucleotide sequence of pSG5 was determined on both strands. pSG5 is 12,208 bp in length and has a GC content of 68 mol%. Characterization of the open reading frames by insertion and deletion analysis revealed that only a single gene, traB, is involved in the transfer of pSG5. The deduced amino acid sequence of TraB is similar to the SpoIIIE protein that is responsible for chromosome translocation during prespore formation of Bacillus subtilis. In contrast to the tra genes of the other Streptomyces plasmids, the pSG5 traB does not represent a kill function. Although pSG5 transfer is not associated with pock formation, pSG5 was shown to possess putative spd genes that are responsible for the pock phenotype of other Streptomyces plasmids. However, promoter-probe experiments revealed that the spd genes of pSG5 are not transcribed, thus explaining the deficiency in pock formation.    Spore formation is an extreme response of some bacteria to adversity. In Bacillus subtilis the proteins of the sin, sporulation inhibition, region form a component of an elaborate molecular circuitry that regulates the commitment to sporulation. SinR is a tetrameric repressor protein that binds to the promoters of genes essential for entry into sporulation and prevents their transcription. This repression is overcome through the activity of SinI, which disrupts the SinR tetramer through the formation of a SinI-SinR heterodimer. The interactions governing this curious quaternary transition are revealed in the crystal structure of the SinI-SinR complex. The most striking, and unexpected, finding is that the tertiary structure of the DNA-binding domain of SinR is identical with that of the corresponding domains of the repressor proteins, CI and Cro, of bacteriophage 434 that regulate lysis/lysogeny. This structural similarity greatly exceeds that between SinR and any bacterial protein or between the 434 repressor proteins and their homologues in the closely related bacteriophage lambda. The close evolutionary relationship implied by the structures of SinR and the 434 repressors provokes both comparison of their functions and a speculative consideration of the intriguing possibility of an evolutionary link between the two adaptive responses, sporulation and prophage induction. Copyright 1998 Academic Press.    A highly ordered program of temporal and spatial gene activation during sporulation in Bacillus subtilis is governed by the principal RNA polymerase, and RNA polymerases containing at least five developmental sigma factors appearing successively during sporulation. This report describes a rapid procedure for extracting RNA polymerase from sporulating B. subtilis cells, which involves the construction of hexahistidine tagged beta&apos; subunit of RNA polymerase and the isolation of RNA polymerase holoenzyme with Ni2+-NTA resin. In in vitro transcription of various promoters with the RNA polymerase thus purified, we observed the temporal change of each RNA polymerase activity during sporulation. This procedure enables isolation of RNA polymerase within 4h, starting with cell pellets. Our results indicated that a principal sigma factor, sigmaA, could be detected in a holoenzyme form during all the stages of growth and sporulation, while the other sigma factors sigmaH, sigmaE, sigmaF, sigmaG, and sigmaK involved in sporulation could be detected sequentially during sporulation. Moreover, Spo0A, the central transcription factor of commitment to sporulation, was also co-purified with RNA polymerase at early stages of sporulation.    A novel sporulation-control gene (spo0M) of Bacillus subtilis was cloned, sequenced and analyzed. The spo0M gene is located at the end of large tRNA gene clusters including rrnD and codes for a 257-amino-acid protein with a calculated size of 29.6kDa. The protein Spo0M has a strong negative charge (calculated pI=4.3) and shows no significant sequence homology to any known proteins. Gene disruption experiments revealed that spo0M is not essential for cell viability, but its disruption results in considerable impairments (decreasing by 20- to 100-fold) in sporulation. The morphological stage blocked in sporulation was stage 0 as observed by electron microscopy, and expression analysis using spo0Aps-bgaB fusion revealed an impaired gene expression of spo0A in the spo0M mutant. In contrast, spo0M disruption had no effect on antibiotic productivity. Propagation of the spo0M gene in wild-type cells using a high-copy-number plasmid also impaired sporulation, indicating that overproduction of Spo0M exerts certain negative effects on sporulation. spo0M gene expression is controlled by sigmaH, as demonstrated: (1) by monitoring expression of a bgaB transcriptional fusion integrated into the amyE locus on the chromosome of the wild-type or spo0H mutant cells, and (2) by in-vitro transcription of spo0M gene with EsigmaH.    The RsbT serine kinase has two known functions in the signal transduction pathway that activates the general stress factor sigmaB of Bacillus subtilis. First, RsbT can phosphorylate and inactivate its specific antagonist protein, RsbS. Second, upon phosphorylation of RsbS, RsbT is released to stimulate RsbU, a PP2C phosphatase, thereby initiating a signalling cascade that ultimately activates sigmaB. Here we describe a mutation that separates these two functions of RsbT. Although the mutant RsbT protein had essentially no kinase activity, it still retained the capacity to stimulate the RsbU phosphatase in vitro and to activate sigmaB when overexpressed in vivo. These results support the hypothesis that phosphatase activation is accomplished via a long-lived interaction between RsbT and RsbU. In contrast, RsbT kinase activity was found to be integral for the transmission of external stimuli to sigmaB. Thus, one route by which environmental stress signals could enter the sigmaB network is by modulation of the RsbT kinase activity, thereby controlling the magnitude of the partner switch between the RsbS-RsbT complex and the RsbT-RsbU complex.    pAMbeta1 is a plasmid isolated from Enterococcus faecalis which replicates in Bacillus subtilis by a unidirectional theta mechanism. It has been shown previously that initiation of pAMbeta1 replication requires a plasmid-encoded protein (RepE) and a short origin and is carried out by the host DNA polymerase I. It is not known which primer is used by this polymerase for initiating replication. Here, we report that a transcription fork passing through the origin is a limiting factor for plasmid replication. Transcription that activates the origin is initiated at the repE promoter and is thus regulated by the plasmid copy-number control system. Two lines of evidence suggest that the transcription generates the primer for the DNA polymerase I. First, the transcription must start upstream from the origin and progress in the direction of replication to be effective. Second, 3&apos; ends of RNA transcripts initiated upstream of the origin map within the origin, provided that the Rep protein and an intact origin are present. This is the first report for simultaneous requirement of a transcription fork, a replication protein and the DNA polymerase I in initiation of DNA replication.    We have cloned the rpoD gene encoding the principal sigma (sigma) factor of Helicobacter pylori. The deduced amino acid sequence reveals a predicted polypeptide of 676 residues that has amino acid homology with the principal sigma factors of a number of divergent prokaryotes. We have designated this factor sigma80. Amino acid sequence analysis suggests that region 1.1 is missing in sigma80 and that a region with homology to a regulatory protein from Bacillus subtilis phage SPO1 is present. Genetic studies have indicated that sigma80 is not compatible with the transcriptional machinery of Escherichia coli. However, in vitro sigma80 could be assembled into the E. coli RNA polymerase and could bind to E. coli and H. pylori promoters, suggesting that the sigma80-containing RNA polymerase has the same stoichiometry as the native complex. By exchanging protein domains between E. coli and H. pylori sigma factors, we demonstrate that the sigma80 domain inhibiting transcription from E. coli promoters is confined within the non-conserved spacer region, implying that the spacer region of prokaryotic primary sigma factors plays an important role in the process of transcription. Consistent with its restricted niche and with the availability of a very restricted number of transcriptional regulators, H. pylori may have evolved a spacer region of the sigma factor to modulate total transcription and to quickly respond to microenvironmental changes.    Regulatory protein p4 from Bacillus subtilis phage Phi29 represses the early A2c promoter by binding upstream from RNA polymerase and interacting with the C-terminal domain of the RNA polymerase alpha subunit. This interaction stabilizes the RNA polymerase at the promoter in such a way that promoter clearance is prevented. Here, the binding of protein p4 to the A2c promoter has been studied. In the absence of RNA polymerase, protein p4 was found to bind with low affinity to a site centered at position -39 relative to the transcription start site. When RNA polymerase was present, protein p4 was displaced from this site and bound instead to a different target centered at position -71. Stable binding to this site requires the interaction of protein p4 with the C-terminal domain of the RNA polymerase alpha-subunit. Both sites contain sequences resembling the well-characterized p4 binding site present at the late A3 promoter, to which p4 binds with high affinity. A mutational analysis revealed that the site at -71 is critical for a stable interaction between protein p4 and RNA polymerase, and for efficient repression, whereas mutation of the site at -39 had only a small effect on repression efficiency. Therefore, RNA polymerase plays an active role in the repression mechanism by stabilizing the repressor at the promoter, generating a nucleoprotein complex that is too stable to allow promoter clearance. Copyright 1998 Academic Press.    The tuf gene coding for elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu) of Bacillus stearothermophilus was cloned and sequenced. This gene maps in the same context as the tufA gene of Escherichia coli str operon. Northern-blot analysis and primer extension experiments revealed that the transcription of the tuf gene is driven from two promoter regions. One of these is responsible for producing a 4.9-kb transcript containing all the genes of B. stearothermophilus str operon and the other, identified adjacent to the stop codon of the fus gene and designated tufp, for producing a 1.3-kb transcript of the tuf gene only. In contrast to the situation in E. coli, the ratio between the transcription products was found to be about 10:1 in favour of the tuf gene transcript. This high transcription activity from the tufp promoter might be accounted for by the presence of an extremely A+T-rich block consisting of 29 nucleotides which immediately precedes the consensus -35 region of the promoter. A very similar tuf gene transcription strategy and the same tufp promoter organization with the identical A/T block were found in Bacillus subtilis. The tuf gene specifies a protein of 395 amino acid residues with a molecular mass of 43,290 Da, including the N-terminal methionine. A computer-generated three-dimensional homology model shows that all the structural elements essential for binding guanine nucleotides and aminoacyl-tRNA are conserved. The presence of serine at position 376 and a low affinity for kirromycin determined by zone-interference gel electrophoresis (Kd approximately 8 microM) and by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis under non-denaturing conditions are in agreement with the reported resistance of this EF-Tu to the antibiotic. The replacement of the highly conserved Leu211 by Met was identified as a possible cause of pulvomycin resistance. Copyright 1998 Academic Press.    A hallmark of sporulation of Bacillus subtilis is the formation of two distinct cells by an asymmetric septum. The developmental programme of these two cells involves the compartmentalized activities of sigmaE in the larger mother cell and of sigmaF in the smaller prespore. A potential role of de novo lipid synthesis on development was investigated by treating B. subtilis cells with cerulenin, a specific inhibitor of fatty acid biosynthesis. These experiments demonstrated that spore formation requires de novo fatty acid synthesis at the onset of sporulation. The transcription of the sporulation genes that are induced before the formation of two cell types or that are under the exclusive control of sigmaF occurred in the absence of fatty acid synthesis, as monitored by spo-lacZ fusions. However, expression of lacZ fusions to genes that required activation of sigmaE for transcription was inhibited in the absence of fatty acid synthesis. The block in sigmaE-directed gene expression in cerulenin-treated cells was caused by an inability to process pro-sigmaE to its active form. Electron microscopy revealed that these fatty acid-starved cells initiate abnormal polar septation, suggesting that de novo fatty acid synthesis may be essential to couple the activation of the mother cell transcription factors with the formation of the differentiating cells.    The nitrate and nitrite reductases of Bacillus subtilis have two different physiological functions. Under conditions of nitrogen limitation, these enzymes catalyze the reduction of nitrate via nitrite to ammonia for the anabolic incorporation of nitrogen into biomolecules. They also function catabolically in anaerobic respiration, which involves the use of nitrate and nitrite as terminal electron acceptors. Two distinct nitrate reductases, encoded by narGHI and nasBC, function in anabolic and catabolic nitrogen metabolism, respectively. However, as reported herein, a single NADH-dependent, soluble nitrite reductase encoded by the nasDE genes is required for both catabolic and anabolic processes. The nasDE genes, together with nasBC (encoding assimilatory nitrate reductase) and nasF (required for nitrite reductase siroheme cofactor formation), constitute the nas operon. Data presented show that transcription of nasDEF is driven not only by the previously characterized nas operon promoter but also from an internal promoter residing between the nasC and nasD genes. Transcription from both promoters is activated by nitrogen limitation during aerobic growth by the nitrogen regulator, TnrA. However, under conditions of oxygen limitation, nasDEF expression and nitrite reductase activity were significantly induced. Anaerobic induction of nasDEF required the ResDE two-component regulatory system and the presence of nitrite, indicating partial coregulation of NasDEF with the respiratory nitrate reductase NarGHI during nitrate respiration.    Bacillus subtilis utilizes glucose as the preferred source of carbon and energy. The sugar is transported into the cell by a specific permease of the phosphoenolpyruvate:sugar phosphotransferase system (PTS) encoded by the ptsGHI operon. Expression of this operon is induced by glucose and requires the action of a positive transcription factor, the GlcT antiterminator protein. Glucose availability is sensed by glucose-specific enzyme II (EIIGlc), the product of ptsG. In the absence of inducer, the glucose permease negatively controls the activity of the antiterminator. The GlcT antiterminator has a modular structure. The isolated N-terminal part contains the RNA-binding protein and acts as a constitutively acting antiterminator. GlcT contains two PTS regulation domains (PRDs) at the C terminus. One (PRD-I) is the target of negative control exerted by EIIGlc. A conserved His residue (His-104 in GlcT) is involved in inactivation of GlcT in the absence of glucose. It was previously proposed that PRD-containing transcriptional antiterminators are phosphorylated and concomitantly inactivated in the absence of the substrate by their corresponding PTS permeases. The results obtained with B. subtilis glucose permease with site-specific mutations suggest, however, that the permease might modulate the phosphorylation reaction without being the phosphate donor.    TRAP (trp RNA-binding attenuation protein) regulates expression of the tryptophan biosynthetic genes in response to tryptophan in Bacillus subtilis by binding to two sites containing a series of 9 or 11 (G/U)AG triplet repeats that are generally separated by two or three spacer nucleotides. Previous mutagenesis experiments have identified three TRAP residues, Lys-37, Lys-56, and Arg-58 that are essential for RNA binding. The location of these residues on the TRAP oligomer supports the proposal that RNA binds TRAP by encircling the TRAP oligomer. In this work, we show that RNAs containing 11 GAG or UAG repeats separated by CC dinucleotide spacers (((G/U)AGCC)11) form stable structures that inhibit binding to TRAP. This conclusion is based on the effects of temperature and Mg2+ on the affinity of TRAP for RNAs with CC spacers combined with UV hyperchromicity and circular dichroism. Furthermore, introducing the base analogue 7-deazaguanosine in the ((G/U)AGCC)11 RNAs stabilized the TRAP-RNA interaction. This effect was associated with decreased stability of the RNA structure as measured by circular dichroism spectroscopy. The precise nature of the structure of the ((G/U)AGCC)11 RNAs is not known but evidence is presented that it involves noncanonical interactions. We also observed that substitution of Arg-58 with Lys further reduced the ability of TRAP to interact with structured RNAs. Since in vivo function of TRAP may involve binding to structured RNAs, we suggest a potential function for this residue, which is conserved in TRAP from three different bacilli.    The insecticidal activity of Bacillus thuringiensis strains toxic to coleopterous insects is due to Cry3 proteins assembled into small rectangular crystals. Toxin synthesis in these strains is dependent primarily upon a promoter that is active in the stationary phase and a STAB-SD sequence that stabilizes the cry3 transcript-ribosome complex. Here we show that significantly higher yields of Cry3A can be obtained by using dual sporulation-dependent cyt1Aa promoters to drive the expression of cry3Aa when the STAB-SD sequence is included in the construct. The Cry3A yield per unit of culture medium obtained with this expression system was 12.7-fold greater than that produced by DSM 2803, the wild-type strain of B. thuringiensis from which Cry3Aa was originally described, and 1.4-fold greater than that produced by NB176, a mutant of the same strain containing two or three copies of cry3Aa, which is the active ingredient of the commercial product Novodor, used for control of beetle pests. The toxicities of Cry3A produced with this construct or the wild-type strain were similar when assayed against larvae of the cottonwood leaf beetle, Chrysomela scripta. The volume of Cry3A crystals produced with cyt1Aa promoters and the STAB-SD sequence was 1.3-fold that of typical bipyramidal Cry1 crystals toxic to lepidopterous insects. The dual-promoter/STAB-SD system offers an additional method for potentially improving the efficacy of insecticides based on B. thuringiensis.    The ability of phenobarbital to induce levels of drug metabolism in mammals has been known for over 40 years. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying increased expression of the genes of the key enzyme in drug metabolism, cytochrome P450, have not been elucidated, primarily because in vitro model systems in which the induction could be studied were not available. Transfected primary cultured hepatocytes, transfection of liver in situ, and transgenic mice now provide suitable models for phenobarbital induction. In this review, progress toward understanding the mechanism of phenobarbital induction of gene expression is discussed with an emphasis on the mammalian genes, CYP2B1, CYP2B2, and Cyp2b10, which are most highly inducible by phenobarbital. Barbiturate induction of P450s in Bacillus megaterium, which is the system best understood, and its relevance to mammalian mechanisms of induction are also discussed. In B. megaterium, the binding of a repressor to several motifs is reversed by direct effects of barbiturates and by induction of positively acting factors. One of the repressor binding sites, the barbie box, is present in many mammalian phenobarbital-inducible genes, including the promimal promoter regions of CYP2B1, CYP2B2, and Cyp2B10. In the mammalian P450 genes, evidence has been proposed for phenobarbital-regulated elements both in the proximal promoter region and in a distal enhancer region. The role of the proximal region is controversial. A positively acting element that overlaps the barbie box sequence and a negative element have been proposed to mediate induction of CYP2B1/2, based primarily on protein binding and cell-free transcription assays. In contrast, other investigators have not found differences in phenobarbital-dependent protein binding in the proximal promoter region nor mediation of phenobarbital induction by this region. A distal gene fragment, at about -2000 kb in CYP2B1, CYP2B2, and Cyp2b10, has been shown to be a phenobarbital-responsive enhancer independent of proximal promoter elements. This fragment contains several binding sites for proteins and several functional elements, including an NF-1 site, and, therefore, has been designated as a phenobarbital-responsive unit. Possible models are presented in which phenobarbital treatment induces altered chromatin structure, which allows the binding of positively acting factors, or activates factors already bound, to the distal enhancer and the proximal promoter.    Early investigations revealed that Bacillus subtilis glutamyl-tRNA synthetase [GluRS (bs)] is responsible for aminoacylating both glutamate tRNA [tRNA(Glu) (bs)] and glutamine tRNA [tRNA(Gln) (bs)] with glutamate. The same Bacillus enzyme can also efficiently attach glutamate to one isoacceptor glutamine tRNA [tRNA(Gln) (ec)] of Escherichia coli in vitro but not to tRNA2(Gln) (ec) and tRNA(Glu) (ec). To characterize identity elements of these glutamine tRNAs in the interaction with GluRS (bs), tRNA2(Gln) (ec), tRNA1(Gln) (ec), three other mutant glutamine tRNAs [tRNA2(Gln) (AU) (C34 --&gt; U34), tRNA2(Gln) (12M) (C34 --&gt; U34, 31A-U39 --&gt; 31U-A39), and tRNA2(Gln) (M21) (64C --&gt; G50 --&gt; 64G-C50, 63U-A51 --&gt; 63A-U51)] originated from tRNA2(Gln) (ec), tRNA(Gln) (bs), and a mutant tRNAM(Gln) (bs) whose U at the 34th position (U34), was replaced to C (C34), were produced in E. coli. All of the E. coli glutamine tRNAs containing U34 such as tRNA1(Gln), tRNA2(Gln) (AU), and tRNA2(Gln) (12M) could be charged with glutamate by GluRS (bs), whereas tRNA2(Gln) (ec) and its T-stem mutant tRNA2(Gln) (M21) containing C34 could not be charged by the same enzyme. The unique change of C34 to U34 of tRNA2(Gln) (ec) acquired glutamate acceptor activity by GluRS (bs). This result suggests that the U34 is the major identity element of tRNA1(Gln) (ec) in the recognition by GluRS (bs). The same situation was found in tRNA(Gln) (bs). The glutamate acceptor activity of tRNA(Gln) (bs) disappeared on replacement of U34 to C34. To find out whether modified bases in tRNA(Gln) (bs) are involved in the recognition by GluRS (bs), glutamylation of tRNA(Gln) (bs) produced by in vitro transcription was also examined but the in vitro transcript of tRNA(Gln) (bs) could not be charged with glutamic acid by GluRS (bs). All of these mean that the major recognition element for GluRS (bs) is U at the 34th position of both tRNA(Gln) (bs) and tRNA1(Gln) (ec) as a modified form.    Expression of the principal chaperones of the heat shock stimulon of Streptomyces albus G are under the negative control of different repressors. The dnaK operon is regulated by hspR, the last gene of the operon (dnaK-grpE-dnaJ-hspR). hsp18, encoding a member of the small heat shock protein family, is regulated by orfY, which is in the opposite orientation upstream of hsp18. The groES-groEL1 operon and the groEL2 gene are regulated differently. They present tandem copies of the CIRCE element found in the 5&apos; region of many heat shock genes and shown to act in Bacillus subtilis as an operator for a repressor encoded by hrcA (hrc stands for heat regulation at CIRCE). We report the identification in S. albus of a new heat shock operon containing hrcA and dnaJ homologs. Disruption of hrcA increased the transcription of the groES-groEL1 operon and of the groEL2 gene. These features were lost when the mutant was complemented in trans by an intact copy of hrcA. Despite considerable accumulation of the GroE chaperones in the hrcA mutant, there was no effect on formation of the aerial mycelium and sporulation, indicating that neither hrcA nor the level of groE gene expression is directly involved in the regulation of Streptomyces morphological differentiation.    Spo0A is a response regulator that controls entry into sporulation by specifically stimulating or repressing transcription of critical developmental genes. Response regulators have at least two domains: an output transcription regulation domain and a receiver domain that inhibits the output domain. Phosphorylation of the receiver domain relieves the inhibition. We examined the in vitro transcription activation mechanism for Spo0A, phosphorylated Spo0A (Spo0A approximately P), and a deletion mutant that consists solely of the C-terminal output domain (Spo0ABD). Both Spo0A approximately P and Spo0ABD stimulated transcription from the spoIIG promoter 10-fold more efficiently than Spo0A. Spo0A approximately P and Spo0ABD induced DNA denaturation by RNA polymerase in the -10 recognition region, whereas Spo0A did not. DNase I footprint assays revealed that phosphorylation enhanced binding of intact Spo0A to the 0A boxes, while the binding of Spo0ABD was similar to that of Spo0A. Thus, activation of Spo0A by phosphorylation is not primarily due to enhanced DNA binding. The presence of a phosphorylated N terminus increased the stability of the ternary complex at the spoIIG promoter. We propose that the primary effect of phosphorylation is to expose an RNA polymerase interaction domain to promote transcription from PspoIIG.    The ftsZ gene was cloned from the chromosomal DNA of Brevibacterium lactofermentum by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using two oligonucleotides designed from two conserved regions found in most of the previously cloned and sequenced ftsZ genes from other microorganisms. ftsZ is a single-copy gene in corynebacteria and is located downstream from ftsQ and murC, indicating linkage between genes involved in peptidoglycan synthesis (mur genes) and genes involved in cell division (fts genes). The organisation of the cluster is similar to that in Streptomyces and different from those of Escherichia coli or Bacillus subtilis because ftsA is not located upstream of ftsZ. The gene was expressed in E. coli using the T7 expression system; the calculated molecular weight of the expressed protein was 50 kDa. Expression of the B. lactofermentum ftsZ gene in E. coli inhibited cell division and led to filamentation. The ftsZ gene of this organism does not complement ftsZ mutations or deletions in E. coli, when cloned on low or high-copy-number vectors.    Spo0A activates transcription in Bacillus subtilis from promoters that are used by two types of RNA polymerase, RNA polymerase containing the primary sigma factor, sigmaA, and RNA polymerase containing a secondary sigma factor, known as sigmaH. The region of sigmaA near positions 356 to 359 is required for Spo0A-dependent promoter activation, possibly because Spo0A interacts with this region of sigmaA at these promoters. To determine if the amino acids in the corresponding region of sigmaH are also important in Spo0A-dependent promoter activation, we examined the effects of single alanine substitutions at 10 positions in sigmaH (201 to 210). Two alanine substitutions in sigmaH, at glutamine 201 (Q201A) and at arginine 205 (R205A), significantly decreased activity from the Spo0A-dependent, sigmaH-dependent promoter spoIIA but did not affect expression from the sigmaH-dependent, Spo0A-independent promoters citGp2 and spoVG. Therefore, promoter activation by Spo0A requires homologous regions in sigmaA and sigmaH. A mutant form of Spo0A, S231F, that suppresses the sporulation defect caused by several amino acid substitutions in sigmaA did not suppress the sporulation defects caused by the Q201A and R205A substitutions in sigmaH. This result and others indicate that different surfaces of Spo0A probably interact with sigmaA and sigmaH RNA polymerases.    The pbp gene (renamed dacC), identified by the Bacillus subtilis genome sequencing project, encodes a putative 491-residue protein with sequence homology to low-molecular-weight penicillin-binding proteins. Use of a transcriptional dacC-lacZ fusion revealed that dacC expression (i) is initiated at the end of stationary phase; (ii) depends strongly on transcription factor sigmaH; and (iii) appears to be initiated from a promoter located immediately upstream of yoxA, a gene of unknown function located upstream of dacC on the B. subtilis chromosome. A B. subtilis dacC insertional mutant grew and sporulated identically to wild-type cells, and dacC and wild-type spores had the same heat resistance, cortex structure, and germination and outgrowth kinetics. Expression of dacC in Escherichia coli showed that this gene encodes an approximately 59-kDa membrane-associated penicillin-binding protein which is highly toxic when overexpressed.    The ubiquitous polyamines fulfil a variety of functions in all three kingdoms of life. However, little is known about the biosynthesis of these compounds in Gram-positive bacteria. We show that, in Bacillus subtilis, there is a single pathway to polyamines, starting from arginine, with agmatine as an intermediate. We first identified the structural gene of arginine decarboxylase, speA (formerly cad), and then described the speE speB operon, directing synthesis of spermidine synthase and agmatinase. This operon is transcribed into two messenger RNAs, a major one for the speE gene and a minor one for both speEand speB. The promoter of the operon was identified upstream from the speE gene by primer extension analysis. Transcription of this operon indicated that the level of agmatinase synthesis is very low, thus allowing a stringent control on the synthesis of putrescine and, therefore, of all polyamines. This is consistent with the level of polyamines measured in the cell.    The mechanisms ensuring regulation of DNA replication in genomes containing multiple replicons are poorly understood. In this report, we addressed this question by analysing in Bacillus subtilis the replication of a derivative of the promiscuous plasmid pIP501 that carries a rolling-circle and a theta replicon. Genetic analyses revealed that the rolling-circle replicon is strongly inhibited in the derivative and that inhibition requires three elements involved in theta replication: the replication origin, the initiator RepR protein and strong transcription of the repR gene. Inhibition is, however, independent of DNA synthesis at the theta origin. We conclude that rolling-circle inhibition is caused by an inhibitory signal encoded by the theta replicon and propose that the signal is composed, at least, of the RepR protein bound to its cognate origin.    In vitro transcription from the spoIIG promoter by Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase reconstituted with wild-type alpha subunits and with C-terminal deletion mutants of the alpha subunit was equally stimulated by the response regulator Spo0A. Some differences in the structure of open complexes formed by RNA polymerase containing alpha subunit mutants were noted, although the wild-type and mutant polymerases appeared to use the same initiation mechanism.    A gene encoding beta-galactosidase, designated mbgA, was isolated from Bacillus megaterium ATCC 14581. Chromosomal beta-galactosidase production could be dramatically induced by lactose but not by isopropyl-beta-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) and was subject to catabolite repression by glucose. Disruption of mbgA in the B. megaterium chromosome resulted in loss of lactose-inducible beta-galactosidase production. A 27-bp inverted repeat was found to overlap the mbgA promoter sequence. Two partially overlapping catabolite-responsive elements (CREs) were identified within the inverted repeat. Base substitutions within CRE-I and/or CRE-II caused partial relief from catabolite repression. The results suggest that the 27-bp inverted repeat may serve as a target for a catabolite repressor(s).    Listeria monocytogenes is well known for its robust physiology, which permits growth at low temperatures under conditions of high osmolarity and low pH. Although studies have provided insight into the mechanisms used by L. monocytogenes to allay the physiological consequences of these adverse environments, little is known about how these responses are coordinated. In the studies presented here, we have cloned the sigB gene and several rsb genes from L. monocytogenes, encoding homologs of the alternative sigma factor sigmaB and the RsbUVWX proteins, which govern transcription of a general stress regulon in the related bacterium Bacillus subtilis. The L. monocytogenes and B. subtilis sigB and rsb genes are similar in sequence and physical organization; however, we observed that the activity of sigmaB in L. monocytogenes was uniquely responsive to osmotic upshifting, temperature downshifting, and the presence of EDTA in the growth medium. The magnitude of the response was greatest after an osmotic upshift, suggesting a role for sigmaB in coordinating osmotic responses in L. monocytogenes. A null mutation in the sigB gene led to substantial defects in the ability of L. monocytogenes to use betaine and carnitine as osmoprotectants. Subsequent measurements of betaine transport confirmed that the absence of sigmaB reduced the ability of the cells to accumulate betaine. Thus, sigmaB coordinates responses to a variety of physical and chemical signals, and its function facilitates the growth of L. monocytogenes under conditions of high osmotic strength.    Using a strain carrying a clpC-bgaB transcriptional fusion at the amyE locus, we found that the expression of a clpC operon was induced at the end of exponential growth in a sigmaB-independent manner and ceased around T3.5 in the wild type but not in a spo0H mutant. This suggests that some gene product(s) whose expression is dependent on sigmaH function is required for the turn-off of clpC transcription during an early stage of sporulation. A clpC deletion mutant showed a temperature-sensitive sporulation phenotype and exhibited an abnormally large accumulation of sigmaH in the cell at 45 degrees C after T2, at which time the sigmaH level in the wild type had begun to decrease. These results, together with the fact that spo0H transcription in the clpC deletion mutant was similar to that of the wild type, suggested that ClpC may be responsible for the degradation of sigmaH after the accomplishment of its role in sporulation. Moreover, as expected from these results, overproduction of Spo0A was also observed after the initiation of sporulation in the clpC deletion mutant at 45 degrees C.    The regulatory functions of the leader region preceding the Lactococcus lactis trp operon have been studied by mutagenesis analysis. This leader presents striking similarity to &apos;T-box&apos; leaders found upstream of many Gram-positive aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase genes and some amino acid biosynthesis operons, which are controlled by antitermination through interaction of the leader transcript with cognate uncharged tRNA. A region of the L. lactis leader transcript also contains a series of (G/U) AG repeats which, in Bacillus, are involved in the binding of the trp RNA-binding protein (TRAP) which controls trp transcription. A screen was developed for the isolation of regulatory mutants affected in the leader region. All spontaneous mutants contained deletions; point mutations were only obtained after UV-induced mutagenesis. All mutations affected the putative transcription terminator upstream of the trp operon, demonstrating that trp is indeed controlled by transcription antitermination.    The three-dimensional structure of d(GCATATGATAG).d(CTATCATATGC), from the promoter region of a gene regulating sporulation in Bacillus subtilis mother cells, was determined utilizing two-dimensional nuclear Overhauser effect (2D NOE) and double-quantum-filtered COSY (2QF-COSY) spectra. To minimize the effect of methods used to obtain restraints and refine structure, several variables were studied. Interproton distance bounds were calculated very conservatively by running the complete relaxation matrix program MARDIGRAS hundreds of times using 2D NOE spectra for exchangeable and for nonexchangeable protons at different mixing times, assuming different overall correlation times and different starting structures. The 435 distance restraints were used with two different structural refinement methods: restrained molecular dynamics (rMD) and restrained Monte Carlo calculations (rMC). Refinement using different procedures and starting structures resulted in essentially the same structure (&lt;0.8 A rmsd), indicating that the structure is defined by experimental restraints and not the refinement method or variables used. R factors indicate the structures fit the experimental NOE data very well. Some helical parameters, notably large negative X displacement, are characteristic of A-DNA, but others are characteristic of B-DNA. As with TG.CA steps in other duplex DNA sequences studied in our laboratory, the two TG.CA steps have a positive roll, with T6-G7 exhibiting the largest, and consequently a bent helix axis. The converged structure represents a time-averaged structure. However, multiple conformations, especially in deoxyriboses, were evident from vicinal coupling constants obtained from quantitative simulations of 2QF-COSY cross-peaks and from persistent inconsistencies in experimental distances due to nonlinear conformational averaging.    The presence of a functional glpT gene in Haemophilus influenzae could be questioned, since there is only what appears to be a truncated glpT (HI0686, 143 nt in the 5&apos;-end) available in the H. influenzae Rd genome database (Fleischmann et al. , 1995). For cloning of the glpT gene from H. influenzae type b strain Eagan, an isogenic glpT, rec-1 double mutant and a selective medium for detection of the glpT mutant strains were constructed. The recombinant plasmid carrying glpT was able to complement the isogenic glpT mutant to wild-type levels of G3P uptake and permitted growth on a selective medium with G3P as a major carbon source. The nucleotide sequences of the glpT gene were determined both directly from PCR products and from the cloned DNA insert of strain Eagan. An identical 1440 bp open reading frame with 480 deduced amino acids, highly homologous to other bacterial G3P permeases, was identified. A Northern blot analysis showed that the glpT genes in both Eagan and Rd strains were transcribed on a RNA of approximately 1.4 kb in size. Thus, it is likely that HI0686 sequence originates from a mutated glpT clone in Escherichia coli.    We report the 1.7 A crystal structure of ribosomal protein S4 from Bacillus stearothermophilus. To facilitate the crystallization, 41 apparently flexible residues at the N-terminus of the protein have been deleted (S4Delta41). S4Delta41 has two domains; domain 1 is completely alpha-helical and domain 2 comprises a five-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet with three alpha-helices packed on one side. Domain 2 is an insertion within domain 1, and it shows significant structural homology to the ETS domain of eukaryotic transcription factors. A phylogenetic analysis of the S4 primary structure shows that the likely RNA interaction surface is predominantly on one side of the protein. The surface is extensive and highly positively charged, and is centered on a distinctive canyon at the domain interface. The latter feature contains two arginines that are totally conserved in all known species of S4 including eukaryotes, and are probably crucial in binding RNA. As has been shown for other ribosomal proteins, mutations within S4 that affect ribosome function appear to disrupt the RNA-binding sites. The structure provides a framework with which to probe the RNA-binding properties of S4 by site-directed mutagenesis.    The basic properties of prokaryotic promoters and the promotor region are described with special emphasis on promoters that are found in Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis. Promoters recognized by major and minor forms of RNA polymerase holoenzymes are compared for their specificities and differences. Both natural and hybrid promoters that have been constructed for purposes of efficient and regulated transcription are discussed in terms of their utility. Since promoter regions contain sequences that are recognized not only by RNA polymerase but by positive and negative regulatory factors that regulate expression from promoters, the functions and properties of these promoter regions are also described. The current utility and the future prospects of the prokaryotic promoters in expressing heterologous genes for biotechnology purposes are discussed.    whiH is one of several known loci specifically needed for the orderly multiple sporulation septation of aerial hyphae of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) and for the expression of at least some late sporulation genes. DNA complementing whiH mutants was located immediately upstream on hrdB, which encodes the principal sigma factor of S. coelicolor. Sequencing revealed a gene whose disruption gave rise to a typical whiH mutant phenotype. Four whiH mutants contained base changes or a frameshift in this gene. The deduced product of whiH related to a large family of bacterial regulatory proteins, the most similar being several repressors (such as GntR of Bacillus subtilis) responsive to carboxylate-containing intermediates in carbon metabolism. Transcription of whiH was initiated at a single promoter, PwhiH. Levels of whiH mRNA were developmentally regulated, increasing sharply when aerial mycelium was present, and reaching a maximum approximately when spores were first detectable. Transcript levels were markedly increased in a whiH mutant, indicating the possible involvement of WhiH in negative regulation of its own production. PwhiH was directly dependent on the sigma factor encoded by another sporulation gene, whiG, as shown by in vivo and in vitro transcription analysis.    The opuE gene from Bacillus subtilis encodes a transport system (OpuE) for osmoprotective proline uptake and is expressed from two osmoregulated promoters: opuE P-1 recognized by the vegetative sigma factor A (sigma A and opuE P-2 dependent on the stress-induced transcription factor sigma B (sigma B). The contributions of these two promoters to osmoregulation of opuE were analysed. Genetic studies using chromosomal opuE-treA operon fusions revealed that opuE transcription is rapidly induced after an osmotic upshock. The strength of opuE expression is proportionally linked to the osmolarity of the growth medium. Deletion analysis of the opuE regulatory region identified a 330 bp DNA segment carrying all sequences required in cis for full and osmoregulated transcription. The proper rotational orientation of the upstream region present within this fragment was essential for the function of both opuE promoters. Mutant opuE-treA fusions with defects in either the sigma A-or the sigma B-dependent promoters revealed different contributions of these sequences to the overall osmoregulation of opuE. opuE P-2 (sigma B) activity increased transiently after an osmotic upshock and did not significantly contribute to the level of opuE expression in cells subjected to long-term osmotic stress. In contrast, transcription initiating from opuE P-1 (sigma A) rose in proportion to the external osmolarity and was maintained at high levels. Moreover, both promoters exhibited a different response to the osmoprotectant glycine betaine in the medium. Our results suggest that at least two different signal transduction pathways operate in B. subtilis to communicate osmotic changes in the environment to the transcription apparatus of the cell.    Fur (ferric uptake regulator) proteins control iron uptake in many Gram-negative bacteria. Although Fur homologues have been identified in Gram-positive bacteria, their roles in gene regulation are unknown. Genome sequencing has revealed three fur homologues in Bacillus subtilis: yqkL, yqfV and ygaG. We demonstrate that yqkL encodes an iron uptake repressor: both siderophore biosynthesis and transcription of ferri-siderophore uptake genes is constitutive in the yqkL mutant. Thus, yqkL encodes a repressor that is functionally as well as structurally related to Fur. B. subtilis peroxide stress genes are induced by either H2O2 or by metal ion limitation. Previous genetic studies defined a regulatory locus, perR, postulated to encode the peroxide regulon repressor. We demonstrate that a ygaG mutant has the perR phenotype: It is highly resistant to peroxides and overexpresses catalase, alkyl hydroperoxide reductase and the DNA binding protein MrgA. Nine spontaneous perR mutations, isolated by virtue of their ability to derepress mrgA transcription in the presence of managanous ion, all contain sequence changes in the ygaG locus and can be complemented by the cloned ygaG gene. Thus, ygaG encodes the peroxide regulon repressor and is allelic with perR.    The SpoOJA and SpoOJB proteins of Bacillus subtilis are similar to the ParA and ParB plasmid-partitioning proteins, respectively, and mutation of spoOJB prevents the expression of stage II genes of sporulation. This phenotype is a consequence of SpoOJA activity in the absence of SpoOJB, and its basis was unknown. In the studies reported here, SpoOJA was found specifically to dissociate transcription initiation complexes formed in vitro by the phosphorylated sporulation transcription factor SpoOA and RNA polymerase with the spollG promoter. This repressor-like activity is likely to be the basis for preventing the onset of differentiation in vivo. SpoOJB is known to neutralize SpoOJA activity in vivo and also to interact with a mitotic-like apparatus responsible for chromosome partitioning. These data suggest that SpoOJA and SpoOJB form a regulatory link between chromosome partition and development gene expression.    The expression of the trp operon of Lactococcus lactis is regulated in response to tryptophan availability by a mechanism of transcription antitermination. We present evidence in support of a previously described model involving tRNATrp as a key element in the sensing of tryptophan levels and the realization of the regulatory response to tryptophan limitation. In agreement with this model, two sites of presumed direct interaction between the trp leader transcript and tRNATrp are found to be of crucial importance for efficient antitermination. These correspond to the specifier codon, which presumably interacts with the anticodon in the tRNA, and a sequence complementary to, and presumably interacting with, the acceptor stem of the tRNA. Through these interactions, uncharged tRNATrp is believed to stabilize an antiterminator conformation of the trp leader transcript, thus allowing transcription and expression of the structural genes of the operon. For the first time, we present direct evidence that it is the ratio of uncharged to charged tRNA that is important for the regulation of antitermination, rather than the absolute amount of uncharged tRNA. In addition, our results indicate that the codon-anticodon interaction, although contributing largely to the efficiency of the regulatory response, is not strictly indispensable, which suggests the existence of additional interactions between mRNA and tRNA. Finally, we describe a possible additional level of regulation, superimposed and dependent on tRNA-mediated anti-termination control, that is based on the processing of the trp leader transcript. Together with the regulation mechanisms described earlier for the Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis trp operons, this constitutes the third different mechanism of transcript elongation control found to be involved in the regulation of an operon of which the structural genes are highly conserved.    It is well established that the expression of Bacillus thuringiensis (B.t.) toxin genes in higher plants is severely limited at the mRNA level, but the cause remains controversial. Elucidating whether mRNA accumulation is limited transcriptionally or posttranscriptionally could contribute to effective gene design as well as provide insights about endogenous plant gene-expression mechanisms. To resolve this controversy, we compared the expression of an A/U-rich wild-type cryIA(c) gene and a G/C-rich synthetic cryIA(c) B.t.-toxin gene under the control of identical 5&apos; and 3&apos; flanking sequences. Transcriptional activities of the genes were equal as determined by nuclear run-on transcription assays. In contrast, mRNA half-life measurements demonstrated directly that the wild-type transcript was markedly less stable than that encoded by the synthetic gene. Sequences that limit mRNA accumulation were located at more than one site within the coding region, and some appeared to be recognized in Arabidopsis but not in tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum). These results support previous observations that some A/U-rich sequences can contribute to mRNA instability in plants. Our studies further indicate that some of these sequences may be differentially recognized in tobacco cells and Arabidopsis.    Some foreign genes introduced into plants are poorly expressed, even when transcription is controlled by a strong promoter. Perhaps the best examples of this problem are the cry genes of Bacillus thuringiensis (B.t.), which encode the insecticidal proteins commonly referred to as B.t. toxins. As a step toward overcoming such problems most effectively, we sought to elucidate the mechanisms limiting the expression of a typical B.t.-toxin gene, cryIA(c), which accumulates very little mRNA in tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) cells. Most cell lines transformed with the cryIA(c) B.t.-toxin gene accumulate short, polyadenylated transcripts. The abundance of these transcripts can be increased by treating the cells with cycloheximide, a translation inhibitor that can stabilize many unstable transcripts. Using a series of hybridizations, reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reactions, and RNase-H-digestion experiments, poly(A+) addition sites were identified in the B.t.-toxin-coding region corresponding to the short transcripts. A fourth polyadenylation site was identified using a chimeric gene. These results demonstrate for the first time to our knowledge that premature polyadenylation can limit the expression of a foreign gene in plants. Moreover, this work emphasizes that further study of the fundamental principles governing polyadenylation in plants will have basic as well as applied significance.    The Bacillus subtilis fbp gene encoding fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (FBPase) was originally identified as yydE. The fbp gene was expressed at a fairly constant level in cells undergoing glycolysis or gluconeogenesis. fbp transcription was initiated 94 bp upstream of the translation initiation codon, resulting in a 2.4-kb monocistronic transcript. Interestingly, B. subtilis FBPase exhibited no significant similarity to other FBPases in protein sequence databases.    Bacillus subtilis, like many bacteria, will choose among several response pathways when encountering a stressful environment. Among the processes activated under growth-restricting conditions are sporulation, establishment of motility, and competence development. Recent reports implicate ComK and MecA-ClpC as part of a system that regulates both motility and competence development. MecA, while negatively controlling competence by inhibiting ComK, stimulates sigmaD-dependent transcription of genes that function in motility and autolysin production. Both ComK-dependent and -independent pathways have been proposed for MecA&apos;s role in the regulation of motility. Mutations in mecA reduce the transcription of hag. encoding flagellin, and are partially suppressed by comK in both medium promoting motility and medium promoting competence. Reduced sigmaD levels are observed in mecA mutants grown in competence medium, but no change in sigmaD concentration is detected in a comK mutant. The comF operon, transcription of which requires ComK, is located immediately upstream of the operon that contains the flgM gene, encoding the sigmaD-specific antisigma factor. An insertion mutation that disrupts the putative comF-flgM transcription unit confers a phenotype identical to that of the comK mutant with respect to hag-lacZ expression. Expression of a flgM-lacZ operon fusion is reduced in both sigD and comK mutant cells but is abolished in the sigD comK double mutant. Reverse transcription-PCR examination of the comF-flgM transcript indicates that readthrough from comF into the flgM operon is dependent on ComK. ComK negatively controls the transcription of hag by stimulating the transcription of comF-flgM, thereby increasing the production of the FlgM antisigma factor that inhibits sigmaD activity. There likely exists another comK-independent mechanism of hag transcription that requires mecA and possibly affects the sigmaD concentration in cells undergoing competence development.    In this report we present the identification and analysis of two Bacillus subtilis genes, yklA and ykzA, which are homologous to the partially RpoS-controlled osmC gene from Escherichia coli. The yklA gene is expressed at higher levels in minimal medium than in rich medium and is driven by a putative vegetative promoter. Expression of ykzA is not medium dependent but increases dramatically when cells are exposed to stress and starvation. This stress-induced increase in ykzA expression is absolutely dependent on the alternative sigma factor sigmaB, which controls a large stationary-phase and stress regulon. ykzA is therefore another example of a gene common to the RpoS and sigmaB stress regulons of E. coli and B. subtilis, respectively. The composite complex expression pattern of the two B. subtilis genes is very similar to the expression profile of osmC in E. coli.    In the present studies, we show that the SecD and SecF equivalents of the Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis are jointly present in one polypeptide, denoted SecDF, that is required to maintain a high capacity for protein secretion. Unlike the SecD subunit of the pre-protein translocase of Escherichia coli, SecDF of B. subtilis was not required for the release of a mature secretory protein from the membrane, indicating that SecDF is involved in earlier translocation steps. Strains lacking intact SecDF showed a cold-sensitive phenotype, which was exacerbated by high level production of secretory proteins, indicating that protein translocation in B. subtilis is intrinsically cold-sensitive. Comparison with SecD and SecF proteins from other organisms revealed the presence of 10 conserved regions in SecDF, some of which appear to be important for SecDF function. Interestingly, the SecDF protein of B. subtilis has 12 putative transmembrane domains. Thus, SecDF does not only show sequence similarity but also structural similarity to secondary solute transporters. Our data suggest that SecDF of B. subtilis represents a novel type of the SecD and SecF proteins, which seems to be present in at least two other organisms.    Approximately 47% of the genes of the Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis belong to paralogous gene families. The present studies were aimed at the functional analysis of the sip gene family of B. subtilis, consisting of five chromosomal genes, denoted sipS, sipT, sipU, sipV, and sipW. All five sip genes specify type I signal peptidases (SPases), which are actively involved in the processing of secretory preproteins. Interestingly, strains lacking as many as four of these SPases could be obtained. As shown with a temperature-sensitive SipS variant, only cells lacking both SipS and SipT were not viable, which may be caused by jamming of the secretion machinery with secretory preproteins. Thus, SipS and SipT are of major importance for protein secretion. This conclusion is underscored by the observation that only the transcription of the sipS and sipT genes is temporally controlled via the DegS-DegU regulatory system, in concert with the transcription of most genes for secretory preproteins. Notably, the newly identified SPase SipW is highly similar to SPases from archaea and the ER membrane of eukaryotes, suggesting that these enzymes form a subfamily of the type I SPases, which is conserved in the three domains of life.    Expression of the alpha-amylase gene (amyE) of Bacillus subtilis is subject to CcpA (catabolite control protein A)-mediated catabolite repression, a global regulatory mechanism in Bacillus and other Gram-positive bacteria. To determine effectors of CcpA, we tested the ability of glycolytic metabolites, nucleotides, and cofactors to affect CcpA binding to the amyE operator, amyO. Those that stimulated the DNA-binding affinity of CcpA were tested for their effect on transcription. HPr-P (Ser-46), proposed as an effector of CcpA, also was tested. In DNase I footprint assays, the affinity of CcpA for amyO was stimulated 2-fold by fructose-1,6-diphosphate (FDP), 1.5-fold by oxidized or reduced forms of NADP, and 10-fold by HPr-P (Ser-46). However, the triple combinations, CcpA/NADP/HPr-P (Ser-46) and CcpA/FDP/HPr-P (Ser-46) synergistically stimulated DNA-binding affinity by 120- and 300-fold, respectively. NADP added to CcpA specifically stimulated transcription inhibition of the amyE promoter by 120-fold. CcpA combined with HPr (Ser-46) inhibited transcription from the amyE promoter, but it also inhibited several control promoters. FDP did not stimulate transcription inhibition by CcpA nor did the triple combinations. The finding that NADP had little effect on CcpA DNA binding but increased the ability of CcpA to inhibit transcription suggests that catabolite repression is not simply caused by CcpA binding amyO but rather a result of interactions with the transcription machinery enhanced by NADP.    AmyL, an extracellular alpha-amylase from Bacillus licheniformis, is resistant to extracellular proteases secreted by Bacillus subtilis during growth. Nevertheless, when AmyL is produced and secreted by B. subtilis, it is subject to considerable cell-associated proteolysis. Cell-wall-bound proteins CWBP52 and CWBP23 are the processed products of the B. subtilis wprA gene. Although no activity has been ascribed to CWBP23, CWBP52 exhibits serine protease activity. Using a strain encoding an inducible wprA gene, we show that a product of wprA, most likely CWBP52, is involved in the posttranslocational stability of AmyL. A construct in which wprA is not expressed exhibits an increased yield of alpha-amylase. The potential role of wprA in protein secretion is discussed, together with implications for the use of B. subtilis and related bacteria as hosts for the secretion of heterologous proteins.    Initiation of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis is controlled by several regulators which affect activation by phosphorylation of the key response regulator Spo0A or transcription of Spo0A-P-dependent genes. In vivo overexpression of one of these regulators, sinR , results in suppression of transcription from the Spo0A-P-dependent promoters of spo0A , spoIIA , spoIIE and spoIIG and in vitro SinR binds to the promoters of the spoIIA operon and the spo0A gene. In this study we have demonstrated that in vitro SinR directly repressed Spo0A- P-dependent transcription by B.subtilis RNA polymerase from the spoIIG operon promoter. SinR inhibited transcription prior to formation of heparin-resistant complexes but did not displace RNA polymerase from the spoIIG promoter. DNase I protection studies demonstrated that SinR protected a large region of the spoIIG promoter and induced DNase I hypersensitive sites, particularly around the 0A boxes, at the same positions as those induced by zinc. Since binding of zinc induces bends in the DNA, we concluded that SinR binding also altered the conformation of the spoIIG promoter. We propose that SinR-induced conformational changes in Spo0A-dependent promoters prevent activation of trans-cription by Spo0A-P.    Expression of the trpEDCFBA operon is regulated at both the transcriptional and translational levels by the trp RNA-binding attenuation protein (TRAP) of Bacillus subtilis. When cells contain sufficient levels of tryptophan to activate TRAP, the protein binds to trp operon transcripts as they are being synthesized, most often causing transcription termination. However, termination is never 100% efficient, and transcripts that escape termination are subject to translational control. We determined that TRAP-mediated translational control of trpE can occur via a novel RNA conformational switch mechanism. When TRAP binds to the 5&apos;-untranslated leader segment of a trp operon read-through transcript, it can disrupt a large secondary structure containing a portion of the TRAP binding target. This promotes refolding of the RNA such that the trpE Shine-Dalgarno sequence, located more than 100 nucleotides downstream from the TRAP binding site, becomes sequestered in a stable RNA hairpin. Results from cell-free translation, ribosome toeprint, and RNA structure mapping experiments demonstrate that formation of this structure reduces TrpE synthesis by blocking ribosome access to the trpE ribosome binding site. The role of the Shine-Dalgarno blocking hairpin in controlling translation of trpE was confirmed by examining the effect of multiple nucleotide substitutions that abolish the structure without altering the Shine-Dalgarno sequence itself. The possibility of protein-mediated RNA refolding as a general mechanism in controlling gene expression is discussed.    A new class of inhibitors of the two-component regulatory systems (TCS) of bacteria was discovered based on the salicylanilide screening hits, closantel (1) and tetrachlorosalicylanilide (9). A systematic SAR study versus a model TCS, KinA/Spo0F, demonstrated the importance of electron-attracting substituents in the salicyloyl ring and hydrophobic groups in the anilide moiety for optimal activity. In addition, derivatives 8 and 16, containing the 2, 3-dihydroxybenzanilide structural motif, were potent inhibitors of the autophosphorylation of the KinA kinase, with IC50s of 2.8 and 6. 3 &amp;microM, respectively. Compound 8 also inhibited the TCS mediating vancomycin resistance (VanS/VanR) in a genetically engineered Enterococcus faecalis cell line at concentrations subinhibitory for growth. Closantel (1), tetrachlorosalicylanilide (9), and several related derivatives (2, 7, 10, 11, 20) had antibacterial activity against the drug-resistant organisms, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium (VREF).    Two divergently transcribed open reading frames: cpsX and cpsY separated by a common regulatory region was identified upstream of the cpsA-D genes involved in polysaccharide capsule biosynthesis in group B streptococci (GBS). We suggest that these genes are involved in the regulation of capsule expression in GBS, since the CpsX protein shares sequence similarities with LytR of Bacillus subtilis, an attenuator of transcription while CpsY has similarity to a wide variety of members of the LysR family of transcriptional regulators. No deletions, insertions, DNA rearrangements, or apparent differences were discovered in the postulated regulatory genes when the gene region was compared in GBS with different capsule phenotypes. Thus, other yet unidentified gene loci may control capsule phase variation in GBS.    tagA, tagD, and tuaA operons are responsible for the synthesis of cell wall anionic polymer, teichoic acid, and teichuronic acid, respectively, in Bacillus subtilis. Under phosphate starvation conditions, teichuronic acid is synthesized while teichoic acid synthesis is inhibited. Expression of these genes is controlled by PhoP-PhoR, a two-component system. It has been proposed that Pho-P plays a key role in the activation of tuaA and the repression of tagA and tagD. In this study, we demonstrated the role of Pho-P in the switch process from teichoic acid synthesis to teichuronic acid synthesis, by using an in vitro transcription system. The results indicate that PhoP approximately P is sufficient to repress the transcription of the tagA and tagD promoters and also to activate the transcription of the tuaA promoter.    A purR::pGh9:ISS1 mutant of Lactococcus lactis was obtained following transposon mutagenesis of strain MG1363 and selection for purine auxotrophs. After determination of the nucleotide sequence and deduction of the purR reading frame, the PurR product was found to be highly similar to the purR-encoded repressor from Bacillus subtilis. The wild-type purR gene complemented the purine auxotrophy of a purR::ISS1 mutant, and it was shown that the purR::ISS1 mutation lowered the level of transcription from the purine-regulated L. lactis purD promoter. In a parallel study on the regulation of purC and purD expression in L. lactis (M. Kilstrup, S. G. Jessing, S. B. Wichmand-Jorgensen, M. Madsen, and D. Nilsson, J. Bacteriol. 180:3900-3906, 1998), we identified regions (PurBox sequences: AWWWCCGAACWWT) upstream of the promoters with a central G residue at exactly position -76 relative to the transcriptional start site. The PurBox sequences were found to be required for high-level promoter activity and purine regulation. We identified a PurBox sequence overlapping the -35 region of the L. lactis purR promoter and found, by studies of a purR-lacLM fusion plasmid, that purR is autoregulated. Because of the high degree of similarity of the PurR proteins from B. subtilis and L. lactis, we looked for PurBox sequences in the promoter regions of the PurR-regulated genes in B. subtilis and identified a perfectly matching PurBox sequence in the purA promoter region and slightly degenerate PurBox-like sequences in the promoter regions for the pur operon and the purR gene. Interestingly, the PurBox in the pur operon of B. subtilis is located almost identically, with respect to the promoter, to the PurBox sequences located in front of purC and purD in L. lactis. We present a hypothesis to explain how an ancestral PurR protein in B. subtilis could have evolved from an activator of the pur operon into a repressor which regulates transcription initiation from the same pur promoter by using the same PurR binding site and a similar response toward its effectors.    The Bacillus subtilis genome encodes at least 17 distinct sigma factors, including seven members of the extracytoplasmic function (ECF) subfamily. We have investigated the expression and regulation of the ECF sigma factor encoded by the sigW gene. A sigmaW-dependent promoter (PW) precedes sigW, demonstrating that this transcription factor is positively autoregulated. Expression of sigW is regulated by both growth phase and medium composition. Maximal expression is attained in early-stationary-phase cells grown in rich medium. We previously reported that sigW mutants have elevated transcription of some sigmaX-controlled genes, and we now report that the converse is also true: in a sigX mutant, PW is derepressed during logarithmic growth. Thus, these two regulons are mutually antagonistic. Reconstituted sigmaW holoenzyme faithfully recognizes the PW preceding sigW but does not recognize the PX promoter preceding the sigX gene. Autoregulation of sigX is also highly specific: sigmaX holoenzyme initiates transcription from PX but recognizes PW poorly if at all. In contrast, several promoters that are at least partially under sigmaX control are active with both the sigmaX and sigmaW holoenzymes in vitro. This finding supports the suggestion that the sigmaW and sigmaX regulons overlap. Sequence comparisons suggest that promoters recognized by these two sigma factors have similar -35 elements but are distinguished by different base preferences at two key positions within the -10 element.    The similarity of the transcriptional apparatus of Archaea with that of Eucarya makes studies of their transcriptional regulation especially interesting. Such investigations are greatly facilitated by reporter genes. The concomitant analysis of several promoters for investigations of regulatory patterns requires different reporter genes. The archaeon Methanococcus voltae is a moderately halophilic mesophile. The treA gene from Bacillus subtilis appeared to be a good candidate for a reporter, since its product trehalase is salt-resistant. We show that it is indeed expressed under the control of a M. voltae promoter and that the enzyme is easily testable in cell lysates.    The Bacillus subtilis pstS operon and phoA gene are members of the Pho regulon that is controlled by PhoR, a histidine kinase, and PhoP, a response regulator. Footprinting analysis showed that phosphorylated PhoP extended the PhoP protected region in pstS and phoA promoters, and also bound to a separate site within the coding region of each gene. Our previous in vivo studies have shown that, in contrast to other Pho regulon promoters that are not expressed in either phoP or phoR mutants, a low-level induction from the pstS promoter (25% of parent strain) can be detected in a phoR mutant. In this study, by using an in vitro transcription system, we demonstrate that (i) only phosphorylated PhoP is a transcriptional activator of the pstS operon and of the phoA gene; (ii) phosphorylated PhoP and RNA polymerase sigmaA holoenzyme are sufficient for in vitro transcription of the pstS promoter and the phoA promoter; (iii) the activation of the pstS promoter requires lower concentrations of phosphorylated PhoP than does the phoA promoter for transcription; and (iv) PhoP binding sites in both the pstS promoter core binding region and in the 5&apos; coding region of the gene, which have been identified by footprinting analysis, are important for the transcription of the pstS promoter in vitro.    Alternative sigma factors provide a means of regulating gene expression in response to various extracellular changes. One such class of sigma factors appears to control a variety of functions, including expression of heat-shock genes in Escherichia coli, biosynthesis of alginates and carotenoids in Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Myxococcus xanthus, respectively, iron uptake in E. coli and Pseudomonas spp., nickel and cobalt efflux in Alcaligenes europhus, plant pathogenicity in Pseudomonas syringae and synthesis of outer membrane proteins in Photobacterium sp. strain SS9. Most of these activities deal with extracytoplasmic functions, and such sigmas have been designated as ECF sigma factors. They have also been characterized in Mycobacteria as well as gram-positive bacteria such as Streptomyces coelicolor and Bacillus subtilus and the archaea Sulpholobus acidocaldarius. ECF factors belong to a subfamily of the sigma 70 class, based on their sequence conservation and function across bacterial species. The promoter consensus sequences recognized by the ECF factors are also highly conserved. In most of the cases, the activity of these factors is modulated by a cognate inner membrane protein that has been shown, both in E. coli and in P. aeruginosa, to act as an anti-sigma activity. This inner membrane protein is presumed to serve as a sensor and signalling molecule, allowing an adaptive response to specific environmental change. Presumably, an on-and-off switch of the anti-sigma activity leads to the release of the sigma factor and thereby to the co-ordinate transcription of the specific regulon it governs.    Bacillus subtilis small cytoplasmic RNA (scRNA) is a member of the signal recognition particle RNA family. It is transcribed as a 354-nucleotide primary transcript and processed to a 271-nucleotide mature scRNA. In the precursor, the 5&apos;- and 3&apos;-flanking regions form a stable double-stranded structure based on their complementary sequence. This structure is similar to those of substrates for the double-stranded RNA processing enzyme, RNase III. The B. subtilis enzyme that has similar activity to Escherichia coli RNase III has been purified and is designated Bs-RNase III. Recently, B. subtilis rncS has been shown to encode Bs-RNase III (Wang, W., and Bechhofer, D. H. (1997) J. Bacteriol. 179, 7379-7385). We show here that Bs-RNase III and the purified His-tagged product of rncS cleave pre-scRNA at both 5&apos;- and 3&apos;-sites to produce an intermediate scRNA (scRNA-275), although processing at the 3&apos;-site is less efficient. The 5&apos;-end of scRNA-275 was identical to that of the mature scRNA, whereas it contains four excess nucleotides at the 3&apos;-end. Bs-RNase III cleavage yields a two-base 3&apos;-overhang, which is consistent with the manner in which E. coli RNase III cleaves. We also show that truncation of the rncS gene affected processing, and significant amounts of an intermediate scRNA (scRNA-275) were found to accumulate in the rncS-truncated mutant. It is concluded that Bs-RNase III is an enzyme that processes pre-scRNA.    We have designed a novel coupled transcriptional construct wherein Escherichia coli uracil DNA glycosylase (UDG) and Bacillus subtilis phage PBS-2 encoded uracil DNA glycosylase inhibitor protein (Ugi) genes were cloned in tandem, downstream of an inducible promoter (Ptrc). Use of this bicistronic operon has allowed purification of large amounts of UDG-Ugi complex formed in vivo. The system has also been exploited for purification of large amounts of Ugi. While establishing the expression system, one of the constructs showed detectable suppression of UAG termination codon and resulted in accumulation of a minor population of a putative readthrough polypeptide corresponding to UDG. We discuss the likely occurrence of such a phenomenon in overproduction of other recombinant proteins. Finally, the usefulness of the operon construct in convenient mutational analysis to study the mechanism of UDG-Ugi interaction is also discussed. Copyright 1998 Academic Press.    The expression of Bacillus anthracis protective antigen (PA) in B. subtilis from the pag gene in pPA101-1 was explored in different genetic backgrounds in an attempt to identify opportunities to maximize expression. Introduction of AtxA, which positively regulates PA expression in B. anthracis did not improve expression levels in the protease-deficient strain WB600. Plasmid pPA101-1 was found to carry a deletion which created a new fusion point between vector and insert sequence, and which removed part of the AtxA binding site. The deletion may have occurred as a consequence of recombination between TCTAT sequences within both the vector and insert. Host mutations could influence expression; PA levels from pPA101-1 are threefold higher in a ccpA mutant than in an otherwise isogenic parent, and eightfold higher in an abrB mutant. These data demonstrate that the introduction of mutations affecting catabolite repression and growth phase regulation results in an increase in the yield of PA in this host-vector system. Combining these mutations with a multiply protease-negative background could potentially allow further improvements in PA yield.    The Bacillus subtilis alpha-amylase promoter amy P contains an essential TGTG motif (-16 region) upstream of the -10 region. Mutations of this region significantly reduced in vitro promoter strength. A -15 G--&gt;C transversion eliminated transcription from amy P by both B.subtilis and Escherichia coli RNA polymerase (RNAP). A second alpha-amylase promoter ( amy P2) also required the -16 region for function. To determine conserved sequences in promoters containing -16 region elements, sequences of 64 B.subtilis promoters with the second TG motif of the -16 region were aligned and analyzed. Unlike the E.coli class of &apos;extended -10 promoters&apos;, with a similar TG motif but lacking a -35 region, the -16 region promoters contain highly conserved -35 regions. They also contain conserved A n and T n tracts upstream of the -35 region. In addition, we analyzed all available gram-positive bacterial promoter compilations to determine the generality of the -16 region. From this analysis, the -16 region TRTG motif (R = purine) appears to be a basic element found in a large portion of gram-positive bacterial promoters and is, in the case of at least the alpha-amylase promoters, necessary for transcription by the major form of B.subtilis and E.coli RNAP.    The Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) SigF alternate sigma factor has been shown to have significant homology to the Bacillus subtilis (BSU) stress-response sigma factor, SigB, as well as to the BSU developmental sigma factor, SigF. In this study we report that like both the BSU sigB and sigF genes, MTB sigF is preceded by an open reading frame (usfX) encoding a protein with significant homology to the previously described BSU anti-sigma factors, RsbW and SpollAB. Sequence analysis suggests that the usfX and sigF genes appear to be cotranscribed and translationally coupled. A second open reading frame called usfY precedes usfX, but has no significant homologues and may not be contranscribed with the usfX and sigF. The sigF gene has been overexpressed in Escherichia coli, purified, and used to raise polyclonal antibodies. Immunoblotting demonstrates that MTB SigF is antigenically closer to BSU SigB than to BSU SigF. Fusion of the MTB sigF gene to the MTB hsp60 promoter has demonstrated that inappropriate overexpression of sigF is lethal for the slow-grower Mycobacterium bovis bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG), but not for the rapid-grower Mycobacterium smegmatis which lacks a sigF homologue. Hence, sigF, encoding an MTB stress response, stationary phase transcription factor, is preceded by an antisigma factor homologue and is incompatible with growth when constitutively overexpressed in BCG.    The process of bacterial cell division involves the assembly of a complex of proteins at the site of septation that probably provides both the structural and the cytokinetic functions required for elaboration and closure of the septal annulus. During sporulation in Bacillus subtilis, this complex of proteins is modified by the inclusion of a sporulation-specific protein, SpoIIE, which plays a direct role in gene regulation and also has a genetically separable role in determining the gross structural properties of the specialized sporulation septum. We demonstrate by both green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusions and indirect immunofluorescence microscopy that SpoIIGA, a protein required for proteolytic cleavage of pro-sigmaE, is also targeted to the sporulation septum. Septal localization of SpoIIGA-GFP occurred even in the structurally abnormal septum formed by a SpoIIE null mutant. We also report the isolation of a spoIIGA homologue from Bacillus megaterium, a species in which the cells are significantly larger than those of B. subtilis. We have exploited the physical dimensions of the B. megaterium sporangium, in conjunction with wide-field deconvolution microscopy, to construct three-dimensional projections of sporulating cells. These projections indicate that SpoIIGA-GFP is initially localized in an annulus at the septal periphery and is only later localized uniformly throughout the septa. Localization was also detected in a B. subtilis spo0H null strain that fails to construct a spore septum. We propose that SpoIIGA is sequestered in the septum by an interaction with components of the septation machinery and that this interaction begins before the construction of the asymmetric septum.    In the non-motile mycelial organism Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2), the sporulation gene whiG encodes a protein that closely resembles RNA polymerase sigma factors such as sigma D of Bacillus subtilis, which mainly control motility and chemotaxis genes. Here, we show that the whiG gene product, purified from an Escherichia coli strain carrying an expression construct, could activate E. coli core RNA polymerase in vitro to transcribe a sigma D-dependent motility-related promoter from B. subtilis. Such RNA polymerase holoenzyme preparations could also transcribe from an S. coelicolor promoter, PTH4, previously shown to require an intact whiG gene for in-vivo transcription. The in-vivo dependence on whiG was therefore shown to be direct. Unusually, the initiation of PTH4 transcription in vitro depended on the provision of appropriate dinucleotides. The whiG-dependent PTH4 transcription unit consisted of a single gene, orfTH4. Sequence comparisons suggested that the gene product was a member of a small group of proteins that include the B. subtilis and E. coli ProX proteins. Though none of these proteins shared more than about 30% of extended primary sequence identity, they had similar size and hydropathy profiles, and could be aligned end to end to reveal a mosaic of similarities. The ProX proteins of B. subtilis and E. coli are implicated in glycine betaine transport in response to hyperosmotic stress. However, disruption of orfTH4 did not cause any obvious phenotypic changes in growth or development on media of varying osmotic strengths.    Bm3R1 is a helix-turn-helix transcriptional repressor from Bacillus megaterium whose binding to DNA is inhibited by fatty acids and a wide range of compounds that modulate lipid metabolism. The inactivation of Bm3R1/DNA binding activity results in the activation of transcription of the operon encoding a fatty acid hydroxylase, cytochrome P450 102. The metabolic role of this operon is unknown. It is possible that it is involved in the synthesis of modified fatty acids as part of normal cellular metabolism or may represent a protective mechanism by which B. megaterium detoxifies harmful foreign lipids. In this report we demonstrate that polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) activate the transcription of the CYP102 operon. These PUFA are the most potent activators of the CYP102 operon observed to date, and we show that their effects are due to binding directly to Bm3R1. In addition, cultures that have been treated with the CYP102 inducer, nafenopin, are protected against PUFA toxicity. Resistance to PUFA toxicity is also seen in a Bm3R1-deficient strain that constitutively expresses CYP102. The resistant phenotype of this Bm3R1 mutant strain is reversed by specific chemical inactivation of CYP102. These data demonstrate that Bm3R1 can act as a direct sensor of toxic fatty acids and, in addition, provide the first direct evidence of fatty acids binding to a prokaryotic transcription factor.    Phage psi 29 protein p4 activates the late A3 promoter and represses the early A2c promoter, in both cases by binding upstream from RNA polymerase (RNAP) and interacting with the C-terminal domain of the RNAP alpha subunit. To investigate how this interaction leads to activation at PA3 and to repression at PA2c, mutant promoters were constructed. We show that the position of protein p4 relative to that of RNAP, which is different at each promoter, does not dictate the outcome of the interaction. Rather, in the absence of a-35 consensus box for sigma A-RNAP activation was observed, while in its presence repression occurred. The results support the view that stabilization of RNAP at the promoter over a threshold level leads to repression.    The general stress response of the bacterium Bacillus subtilis is controlled by the sigmaB transcription factor. Here we show that loss of sigmaB reduces stationary-phase viability 10-fold in either alkaline or acidic media and reduces cell yield in media containing ethanol. We further show that loss of the developmental transcription factor sigmaH also has a marked effect on stationary-phase viability under these conditions and that this effect is independent from the simple loss of sporulation ability.    sigmaB, a transcription factor that controls the Bacillus subtilis general stress response regulon, is activated by either a drop in intracellular ATP or exposure to environmental stress. RsbX, one of seven sigmaB regulators (Rsb proteins) whose genes are cotranscribed with sigmaB, is a negative regulator in the stress-dependent activation pathway. To better define the interactions that take place among the Rsb proteins, we analyzed sigB operon mutations which suppress the high-level sigmaB activity that normally accompanies the loss of RsbX. Each of these mutations was in one of three genes (rsbT, -U, and -V) which encode positive regulators of sigmaB, and they all defined amino acid changes which either compromised the activities of the mutant Rsbs or affected their ability to accumulate. sigmaB activity remained inducible by ethanol in several of the RsbX- suppressor strains. This finding supports the notion that RsbX is not needed as the target for sigmaB activation by at least some stresses. sigmaB activity in several RsbX- strains with suppressor mutations in rsbT or -U was high during growth and underwent a continued, rather than a transient, increase following stress. Thus, RsbX is likely responsible for maintaining low sigmaB activity during balanced growth and for reestablishing sigmaB activity at prestress levels following induction. Although RsbX likely participates in limiting the sigmaB induction response, a second mechanism for curtailing unrestricted sigmaB activation was suggested by the sigmaB induction profile in two suppressor strains with mutations in rsbV. sigmaB activity in these mutants was stress inducible but transient, even in the absence of RsbX.    The gene encoding the general stress transcription factor sigmaB in the gram-positive bacterium Listeria monocytogenes was isolated with degenerate PCR primers followed by inverse PCR amplification. Evidence for gene identification includes the following: (i) phylogenetic analyses of reported amino acid sequences for sigmaB and the closely related sigmaF proteins grouped L. monocytogenes sigmaB in the same cluster with the sigmaB proteins from Bacillus subtilis and Staphylococcus aureus, (ii) the gene order in the 2, 668-bp portion of the L. monocytogenes sigB operon is rsbU-rsbV-rsbW-sigB-rsbX and is therefore identical to the order of the last five genes of the B. subtilis sigB operon, and (iii) an L. monocytogenes sigmaB mutant had reduced resistance to acid stress in comparison with its isogenic parent strain. The sigB mutant was further characterized in mouse models of listeriosis by determining recovery rates of the wild-type and mutant strains from livers and spleens following intragastric or intraperitoneal infection. Our results suggest that sigmaB-directed genes do not appear to be essential for the spread of L. monocytogenes to mouse liver or spleen at 2 and 4 days following intragastric or intraperitoneal infection.    The transcription factor Spo0A of Bacillus subtilis has the unique ability to activate transcription from promoters that require different forms of RNA polymerase holoenzyme. One class of Spo0A-activated promoter, which includes spoIIEp, is recognized by RNA polymerase associated with the primary sigma factor, sigma A (sigmaA); the second, which includes spoIIAp, is recognized by RNA polymerase associated with an early-sporulation sigma factor, sigma H (sigmaH). Evidence suggests that Spo0A probably interacts directly with RNA polymerase to activate transcription from these promoters. To identify residues of Spo0A that may be involved in transcriptional activation, we used PCR mutagenesis of the entire spo0A gene and designed a screen using two distinguishable reporter fusions, spoIIE-gus and spoIIA-lacZ. Here we report the identification and characterization of five mutants of Spo0A that are specifically defective in activation of sigmaA-dependent promoters while maintaining activation of sigmaH-dependent promoters. These five mutants identify a 14-amino-acid segment of Spo0A, from residue 227 to residue 240, that is required for transcriptional activation of sigmaA-dependent promoters. This region may define a surface or domain of Spo0A that makes direct contacts with sigmaA-associated holoenzyme.    Spo0A is a DNA binding protein in Bacillus subtilis required for the activation of spoIIG and other promoters at the onset of endospore formation. Activation of some of these promoters may involve interaction of Spo0A and the sigmaA subunit of RNA polymerase. Previous studies identified two single-amino-acid substitutions in sigmaA, K356E and H359R, that specifically impaired Spo0A-dependent transcription in vivo. Here we report the identification of an amino acid substitution in Spo0A (S231F) that suppressed the sporulation deficiency due to the H359R substitution in sigmaA. We also found that the S231F substitution partially restored use of the spoIIG promoter by the sigmaA H359R RNA polymerase in vitro. Alanine substitutions in the 231 region of Spo0A revealed an additional amino acid residue important for spoIIG promoter activation, I229. This amino acid substitution in Spo0A did not affect repression of abrB transcription, indicating that the alanine-substituted Spo0A was not defective in DNA binding. Moreover, the alanine-substituted Spo0A protein activated the spoIIA promoter; therefore, this region of Spo0A is probably not required for Spo0A-dependent, sigmaH-directed transcription. These and other results suggest that the region of Spo0A near position 229 is involved in sigmaA-dependent promoter activation.    The fla/che region contains more than 30 genes required for flagellar synthesis and chemotaxis in Bacillus subtilis, including the gene for the flagellum-specific sigmaD factor, sigD. Sequence and primer extension data demonstrate that a PA promoter immediately upstream of flgB, henceforth referred to as the fla/che PA, and the PD-3 promoter are active in vivo. Transcription from the PD-3 element is dependent on sigmaD activity and is regulated by the flagellum-specific negative regulator, FlgM. In a strain containing a deletion of fla/che PA (PADelta), sigmaD protein was not detected, demonstrating that the fla/che PA is necessary for wild-type expression of the sigD gene. Thus, sigD is part of the &gt;26-kb fla/che operon. Consistent with a lack of detectable sigmaD protein, the PADelta strain grows as long filaments and does not express a sigmaD-dependent hag::lacZ reporter construct. These phenotypes are indicative of a lack of sigD expression or complete inhibition of sigmaD activity by FlgM. However, sigmaD activity is found in a double mutant containing the PADelta and a null mutation in flgM. The double mutant no longer grows as long filaments, and expression of hag::lacZ is partially restored. These data demonstrate that a low level of sigmaD activity does exist in the PADelta mutant but can be detected only in the presence of a null mutation in flgM. Therefore, normal expression of sigD may also involve another promoter(s) within the fla/che operon.    Early in infection of Bacillus subtilis by bacteriophage SPO1, the synthesis of most host-specific macromolecules is replaced by the corresponding phage-specific biosyntheses. It is believed that this subversion of the host biosynthetic machinery is accomplished primarily by a cluster of early genes in the SPO1 terminal redundancy. Here we analyze the nucleotide sequence of this 11.5-kb &quot;host-takeover module,&quot; which appears to be designed for particularly efficient expression. Promoters, ribosome-binding sites, and codon usage statistics all show characteristics known to be associated with efficient function in B. subtilis. The promoters and ribosome-binding sites have additional conserved features which are not characteristic of their host counterparts and which may be important for competition with host genes for the cellular biosynthetic machinery. The module includes 24 genes, tightly packed into 12 operons driven by the previously identified early promoters PE1 to PE12. The genes are smaller than average, with half of them having fewer than 100 codons. Most of their inferred products show little similarity to known proteins, although zinc finger, trans-membrane, and RNA polymerase-binding domains were identified. Transcription-termination and RNase III cleavage sites were found at appropriate locations.    DNA sequences upstream (UP element) of the core promoter (-10, -35 region) of the Bacillus subtilis flagellin gene hag stimulate transcription in vivo and in vitro. We constructed a number of hybrids, placing the UP element of hagp upstream of the core of one SigD-dependent (fliDp) and two SigA-dependent (tmsp, vegp) B. subtilis promoters. The hybrid promoters were fused to a lacZ reporter gene and their activity tested in vivo. The presence of the UP module enhanced transcription at both types of promoters. We conclude that the hagp UP sequence can act as a promoter module independently of the core sequence.    The variable-region genes of monoclonal antibody against Bacillus cereus spores were cloned from mouse hybridoma cells by reverse transcription-PCR. The heavy- and light-chain variable-region genes were connected by a 45-base linker DNA to allow folding of the fusion protein into a functional tertiary structure. For detection of protein expression, a 10-amino-acid strep tag (biotin-like peptide) was attached to the C terminus of recombinant antibody as the reporter peptide. The single-chain antibody construct was inserted into the expression vector and expressed in Escherichia coli under the control of the T7 RNA polymerase-T7 promoter expression system. The expressed single-chain antibody was detected on Western blots by using a streptavidin-conjugated enzyme system. This small recombinant antibody fragment (ca. 28,000 Da by calculation) had B. cereus spore binding ability and antigen specificity similar to those of its parent native monoclonal antibody.    Through mainly in vivo studies, the initiation of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis has been shown to depend on the phosphorylation of the Spo0A transcription factor mediated by the multicomponent phosphorelay via KinAB (C), Spo0F, Spo0B, and Spo0A in this order. RNA polymerase containing sigmaA (EsigmaA) or sigmaH (EsigmaH) transcribes the genes of the phosphorelay components. Phosphorylated Spo0A is also involved in their expression and is required for the induction of sigmaH by repressing its repressor gene abrB. We have examined the effects of phosphorylated Spo0A (Spo0A-P) and AbrB on in vitro transcription of the genes involved in the Spo0A phosphorylation and initiation of sporulation. Spo0A-P repressed EsigmaA-dependent transcription of the kinC and EsigmaH-dependent transcription of spo0A and kinA. EsigmaH-dependent transcription of spo0F was stimulated by Spo0A-P at low concentrations but was repressed by higher amounts of Spo0A-P. On the other hand, AbrB repressed EsigmaA-dependent transcription of spo0H (sigmaH gene), kinC, and abrB, although its effect was not strong. With the present results providing in vitro evidence for the roles of Spo0A-P and AbrB as transcriptional regulators, and other results described in the literature, the positive and negative feedback loops controlling the temporal expression of early sporulation genes are discussed.    The sigmaH of Bacillus subtilis directs transcription of a large number of early sporulation genes, whereas the principal sigma factor, sigmaA, is essential for the transcription of the genes for vegetative growth and early sporulation. We have purified sigmaA and sigmaH proteins, and characterized their properties. The genes encoding sigmaA or sigmaH were separately cloned into an expression vector under the control of T7 promoter. Both proteins were overproduced in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) and purified from inclusion bodies after solubilization with guanidine hydrochloride. Antigenicities and N-terminal amino acid sequences of the overproduced proteins were used to identify both proteins. Unlike sigmaA protein, sigmaH protein showed a DNA-binding ability. To compare the promoter selectivity of the sigmaA protein with that of the sigmaH protein, transcription in vitro of 16 promoters was performed using RNA polymerase holoenzymes reconstituted from a purified core enzyme with either sigmaH or sigmaA. These holoenzymes correctly recognized each of the cognate promoters; sigmaH-RNA polymerase recognized sigmaH promoters but not sigmaA promoters, and vice versa. A competition experiment for core RNA polymerase using sigmaA and sigmaH revealed that sigmaA had a stronger affinity. We propose that the predicted replacement of a sigma subunit in a holoenzyme from sigmaA to sigmaH in vivo at late logarithmic growth phase may require an additional factor, or the modification of a core enzyme or sigma factor.    The Bacillus subtilis clpP gene, encoding the proteolytic component of the Clp or Ti protease, was cloned and sequenced. The amount of clpP-specific mRNA increased after heat shock, salt and ethanol stress, as well as after treatment with puromycin. Two transcriptional start sites upstream of the clpP structural gene were identified, preceded by sequences resembling the consensus sequences of promoters recognized by sigmaA and sigmaB transcriptional factors of the B. subtilis RNA polymerase respectively. Transcription initiation occurred predominantly at the putative sigmaA-dependent promoter in exponentially growing cells and was induced under stress conditions. After exposure to stress, initiation of transcription also increased at the sigmaB-dependent promoter, but to a lesser extent, indicating that clpP belongs to a double promoter-controlled subgroup of class III general stress genes in B. subtilis. In a sigB mutant strain, clpP remained heat and stress inducible at the sigmaA-dependent promoter. BgaB-reporter gene fusions, carrying either the sigmaA- or the sigmaB-dependent promoter, showed a higher bgaB induction at the sigmaA-dependent promoter, whereas a significantly lower level of induction was measured at the sigmaB-dependent promoter. The sigmaA-dependent promoter appeared to be crucial for the heat-inducible transcription of clpP. A CIRCE (controlling inverted repeat of chaperone expression) element, the characteristic regulation target of class I heat shock genes such as dnaK and groESL, was not found between the transcriptional and translational start sites. Mutants lacking either the proteolytic component ClpP or the regulatory ATPase component ClpX were phenotypically distinct from the wild type. Both mutants produced chains of elongated cells and exhibited severely impaired growth under stress conditions and starvation. Comparison of two-dimensional protein gels from wild-type cells with those from clpP and clpX mutant cells revealed several changes in the protein pattern. Several proteins, such as GroEL, PpiB, PykA, SucD, YhfP, YqkF, YugJ and YvyD, which were found preferentially in higher amounts in both clpP and clpX mutants, might be potential substrates for the ClpXP protease.    In the facultatively anaerobic bacterium Bacillus licheniformis a gene encoding a protein of the fumarate nitrate reductase family of transcriptional regulators (Fnr) was isolated. Unlike Fnr proteins from gram-negative bacteria, but like Fnr from Bacillus subtilis, the protein contained a C-terminal cluster of cysteine residues. Unlike in Fnr from B. subtilis, this cluster (Cys226-X2-Cys229-X4-Cys234) is composed of only three Cys residues, which are supposed to serve together with an internal residue (Cys71) as the ligands for an FeS center. Transfer of the B. licheniformis gene to an fnr mutant of B. subtilis complemented the ability for synthesis of nitrate reductase during anaerobic growth.    Krebs cycle enzyme activity in Bacillus subtilis was examined under aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Citrate synthase and aconitase activities in cells grown anaerobically in the presence of nitrate were reduced by as much as 10- and 30-fold, respectively, from levels observed under aerobic culture conditions. The maximum level of isocitrate dehydrogenase activity during anaerobic growth was only twofold lower than that in aerobic cultures. These reductions in activity under conditions of anaerobiosis were found to be primarily the result of reduced Krebs cycle gene transcription. This repression was not dependent on either the fnr or resDE gene products, which have been shown to regulate expression of other B. subtilis genes in response to anaerobic conditions. Additionally, catabolite control proteins CcpA and CcpB were not responsible for the repression. A dyad symmetry element located between positions -73 and -59 relative to the transcription start site of the aconitase gene (citB) promoter was previously shown to be a target of catabolite repression and the binding site for a putative negative regulator during aerobic growth. The deletion of the upstream arm of the dyad symmetry region abolished the citB repression observed during anaerobic growth. Furthermore, neither citZ or citB was repressed in an anaerobically grown citB mutant, an effect that was very likely the result of citrate accumulation. These results suggest that catabolite repression and anaerobic repression of citZ and citB are regulated by a common mechanism that does not involve CcpA, CcpB, Fnr, or ResDE.    Immunofluorescence microscopy was used to study the establishment of compartment-specific transcription during sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. Analysis of the distribution of the anti-anti-sigma factor, SpoIIAA, in a variety of mutant backgrounds supports a model in which the SpoIIE phosphatase, which activates SpoIIAA by dephosphorylation, is sequestered onto the prespore face of the asymmetric septum. Thus, prespore-specific gene expression apparently arises as a result of the compartmentalization of SpoIIE protein. The results also suggest the existence of at least two compartment-specific programs of proteolysis, one dependent on the mother cell-specific sigma factor sigma E and the other dependent on the prespore-specific sigma factor sigma F.    The Bacillus licheniformis beta-galactosidase gene, lacBl, was cloned on a 5.8-kb HindIII fragment into pBR322 and expressed by its own promoter in Escherichia coli. Deletion and complementation analysis showed that the enzyme-encoding region was located on a 4. 1-kb HindIII-ClaI fragment. The transcription region for the lacBl was identified on this fragment with promoter- and terminator-probe plasmids. The deduced sequence of 149 aa of the N-terminal part of lacBl showed aa sequence homology with beta-Gal from B. stearothermophilus, B. circulans, Haloferax alicantei, Clostridium perfringens, Arthrobacter sp.. No significant homology was shared with those found in the lacZ and lacS families. The recombinant beta-galactosidase (LacB1) was purified by FPLC. The molecular mass of the enzyme (80 kDa) and its optimal pH (5.7) and temperature (45 degrees C) were determined.    The promoter selectivity of RNA polymerase (RNAP) can be altered by the association with alternative sigma subunits. Bacillus subtilis hosts a multitude of sigma factors, several of which coordinate the complex developmental program culminating in endospore formation. Genome sequencing has revealed an unanticipated seven new sigma factors of the highly divergent extracytoplasmic function (ECF) sub-family. Virtually nothing is known regarding either the promoter selectivity or the target genes for these newly identified sigma factors. We have used saturation mutagenesis to define a promoter consensus for recognition by one such ECF sigma factor, sigma X. The resulting consensus sequence was used to identify candidate sigma X target sites. Three newly identified sigma X-dependent promoters precede genes encoding regulatory proteins: an AbrB homolog (Abh), a putative response regulator aspartate phosphatase (RapD), and a regulator of autolysin expression (LytR). sigma X also contributes to the expression of CsbB, a putative membrane-bound glucosyl transferase that is partially controlled by the sigma B stress response sigma factor. Since LytR modulates the expression of the major autolytic amidase and CsbB may function in peptidoglycan synthesis or modification, we suggest that sigma X participates in the regulation of peptidoglycan synthesis and turnover.    The spo0A gene of Bacillus subtilis encodes the key factor involved in the initiation of sporulation. It was previously shown that the B. thuringiensis (Bt) cryIIIA gene, encoding a toxin active against coleopteran larvae, is overexpressed in an spo0A mutant of B. subtilis. In this paper we describe the construction of a Bt spo0A mutant strain and its use to produce insecticidal crystal proteins. The spo0A gene of Bt was cloned and identified by its ability to transform a B. subtilis spo0A mutant to prototrophy. Its nucleotide sequence is homologous to the B. subtilis gene. The spo0A gene was replaced in the Bt genome with a disrupted copy to give an Spo- strain unable to initiate sporulation. When the cryIIIA gene was cloned in the Bt spo0A mutant, large amounts of toxins were produced and accumulated to form a large crystal inclusion which remained encapsulated within the ghost cell. These encapsulated toxins were highly active against coleopteran larvae. We anticipate that the cryIIIA expression system and the Bt spo0A mutant will provide a convenient process to generate novel formulations of stabilized and environmentally safe Bt-based biopesticides.    Bacillus subtilis has been thought to have a high readthrough rate at the UGA stop codon because no opal suppressor tRNA has been isolated so far [Lovett et al. (1991) J. Bacteriol. 173, 1810-1812]. To examine whether a tRNATrp which we have characterized [Matsugi et al. (1992) Nucleic Acids Res. 20, 3514] has the ability to read the UGA codon, in vitro translation was performed with a synthetic mRNA containing a test codon, UGA, UAG, UAA, or UGG, in a reading frame. Addition of Trp-tRNATrp to the system significantly increased the readthrough rate only in the case of UGA. This suggests that this tRNATrp has a dual recognition pattern in B. subtilis, i.e., for the canonical tryptophan codon and for readthrough at the UGA stop codon.    Epigenetic mechanisms are not exclusively reserved to eukaryotic organisms. They are also observed in prokaryotes. As described first by Hotchkiss and Gabor, protoplast fusion between strains of Bacillus subtilis produces heterodiploid cells. Heterodiploidy is associated with the inactivation of one of the chromosomes. To study the physical structure of the fusion product and the molecular mechanisms of inactivation, we constructed heterodiploid clones containing two chromosomes labeled by a NotI restriction fragment length polymorphism. In the progeny, we identified haploid recombinant clones that contain a chromosome carrying large regions of inactivated DNA. Studies of both recombinants of the latter kind and heterodiploid cells indicated that chromosomal inactivation was not determined by alteration of the inactivated nucleotide sequence, but was probably due to a modification in the structure of the bacterial chromatin.    LevR, which controls the expression of the levoperon of Bacillus subtilis, is a regulatory protein containing an N-terminal domain similar to the NifA/NtrC transcriptional activator family and a C-terminal domain similar to the regulatory part of bacterial anti-terminators, such as BgIG and LicT. Here, we demonstrate that the activity of LevR is regulated by two phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP)-dependent phosphorylation reactions catalysed by the phosphotransferase system (PTS), a transport system for sugars, polyols and other sugar derivatives. The two general components of the PTS, enzyme I and HPr, and the two soluble, sugar-specific proteins of the lev-PTS, LevD and LevE, form a signal transduction chain allowing the PEP-dependent phosphorylation of LevR, presumably at His-869. This phosphorylation seems to inhibit LevR activity and probably regulates the induction of the lev operon. Mutants in which His-869 of LevR has been replaced with a non-phosphorylatable alanine residue exhibited constitutive expression from the lev promoter, as do levD or levE mutants. In contrast, PEP-dependent phosphorylation of LevR in the presence of only the general components of the PTS, enzyme I and HPr, regulates LevR activity positively. This phosphorylation most probably occurs at His-585. Mutants in which His-585 has been replaced with an alanine had lost stimulation of LevR activity and PEP-dependent phosphorylation by enzyme I and HPr. This second phosphorylation of LevR at His-585 is presumed to play a role in carbon catabolite repression.    Bacterial peptide synthetases have two common features that appear to be strictly conserved. 1) The enzyme subunits are co-regulated at both transcriptional and translational level. 2) The organization of the different enzymatic domains constituting the enzyme fulfills the &quot;colinearity rule&quot; according to which the order of the domains along the chromosome parallels their functional hierarchy. Considering the high degree of conservation of these features, one would expect that mutations such as transcription uncoupling and domain dissociations, deletions, duplications, and reshuffling would result in profound effects on the quality and quantity of synthesized peptides. To start testing this hypothesis, we designed two mutants. In one mutant, the operon structure of surfactin synthetase was destroyed, thus altering the concerted expression of the enzyme subunits. In the other mutant, the thioesterase domain naturally fused to the last amino acid binding domain of surfactin was physically dissociated and independently expressed. When the lipopeptides secreted by the mutant Bacillus subtilis strains were purified and characterized, they appeared to be expressed approximately at the same level of the wild type surfactin and to be identical to it, indicating that specific domain-domain interactions rather than coordinated transcription and translation play the major role in determining the correct assembly and activity of peptide synthetases.    The spore coat of Bacillus subtilis has a unique morphology and consists of polypeptides of different sizes, whose synthesis and assembly are precisely regulated by a cascade of transcription factors and regulatory proteins. We examined the factors that regulate cotS gene expression and CotS assembly into the coat layer of B. subtilis by Northern blot and Western blot analysis. Transcription of cotS mRNA was not detected in sporulating cells of sigmaK and gerE mutants by Northern blot analysis. By Western blot analysis using anti-CotS antibody, CotS was first detected in protein samples solubilized from wild-type cells at 5 h after the start of sporulation. CotS was not detected in the vegetative cells and spores of a gerE mutant or in the spores of mutants deficient in sigmaE, sigmaF, sigmaG, or sigmaK. CotS was detected in the sporangium but not in the spores of a cotE mutant. The sequence of the promoter region of cotS was similar to the consensus sequences for binding of sigmaK and GerE. These results demonstrate that sigmaK and GerE are required for cotS expression and that CotE is essential for the assembly of CotS in the coat. Immunoelectron microscopic observation using anti-CotS antibody revealed that CotS is located within the spore coat, in particular in the inner coats of dormant spores.    Transcription of the Bacillus subtilis nrgAB promoter is activated during nitrogen-limited growth by the TnrA protein. A common inverted repeat, TGTNAN7TNACA (TnrA site), is centered 49 to 51 bp upstream of the transcriptional start sites for the TnrA-regulated nrgAB, gabP P2, and nas promoters. Oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis of the nrgAB promoter region showed that conserved nucleotides within the TnrA site, the A+T-rich region between the two TnrA half-sites, and an upstream A tract are all required for high-level activation of nrgAB expression. Mutations that alter the relative distance between the two half-sites of the nrgAB TnrA site abolish nitrogen regulation of nrgAB expression. Spacer mutations that change the relative distance between the TnrA site and -35 region of the nrgAB promoter reveal that activation of nrgAB expression occurs only when the TnrA site is located 49 to 51 bp upstream of the transcriptional start site. Mutational analysis of the conserved nucleotides in the gabP P2 TnrA site showed that this sequence is also required for nitrogen-regulated gabP P2 expression. The TnrA protein, expressed in an overproducing Escherichia coli strain, had a 625-fold-higher affinity for the wild-type nrgAB promoter DNA than for a mutated nrgAB promoter DNA fragment that is unable to activate nrgAB expression in vivo. These results indicate that the proposed TnrA site functions as the binding site for the TnrA protein. TnrA was found to activate nrgAB expression during late exponential growth in nutrient sporulation medium containing glucose, suggesting that cells become nitrogen limited during growth in this medium.    The spoIIE gene is essential for the compartment-specific activation of transcription factor sigmaF during sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. SpoIIE is a membrane protein that is targeted to the potential sites of asymmetric septation near each pole of the sporulating cell. The cytoplasmic carboxy-terminal domain of SpoIIE contains a serine phosphatase that triggers the release of sigmaF in the prespore compartment after septation. To understand how septum-located SpoIIE is activated selectively in the prespore, we examined the distribution of a SpoIIE-GFP fusion protein. We show that the polar bands of SpoIIE protein actually form sequentially and that the most prominent band develops at the pole where the prespore forms. We also show that the protein is sequestered to the prespore side of the asymmetric septum. Sequestration of SpoIIE into the prespore compartment provides a mechanism that could explain the cell specificity of sigmaF activation.    Spo0A is the central regulator of commitment to sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. Spo0A is a member of the response regulator family of proteins and both represses and stimulates transcription from promoters when activated. In vivo Spo0A activation takes place by phosphorylation and in vitro activation can be accomplished by phosphorylation or removal of the N-terminal domain of the protein. We have examined the mechanism of Spo0A stimulation of transcription from the promoter of the spoIIG operon. This operon encodes one of the first compartment specific sigma factors whose appearance regulates sporulation development. When activated Spo0A was incubated with RNA polymerase and a DNA fragment containing the spoIIG promoter, bases between -13 and -3, relative to the start site of transcription, were denatured. Addition of activated Spo0A or RNA polymerase alone did not induce denaturation. Heteroduplex templates that contained the nontemplate sequence of the wild-type promoter on both strands between positions -3 and -13 were efficiently transcribed without activated Spo0A. These data suggest that DNA strand separation is a two-step process and that the activation of Spo0A creates a form that interacts with the polymerase to induce the first of the two steps.    The establishment of differential gene expression in sporulating Bacillus subtilis involves four protein components, one of which, SpoIIAA, undergoes phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. We have used NMR spectroscopy to determine the solution structure of the nonphosphorylated form of SpoIIAA. The structure shows a fold consisting of a four-stranded beta-sheet and four alpha-helices. Knowledge of the structure helps to account for the phenotype of several strains of B. subtilis that carry known spoIIAA mutations and should facilitate investigations of the conformational consequences of phosphorylation.    The phosphate-deficiency response in Bacillus subtilis is regulated by PhoP and PhoR, a pair of two-component regulatory proteins. PhoR is a histidine kinase and PhoP is a response regulator. Genetic evidence indicates that the Pho-regulon genes, which are induced or repressed under phosphate starvation conditions, are regulated by PhoP and PhoR at the transcriptional level. It has previously been shown that PhoP binds to four Pho-regulon promoters in both unphosphorylated and phosphorylated forms. This study demonstrates that another Pho-regulon gene promoter, the tuaA promoter preceding the operon which is responsible for cell wall teichuronic acid synthesis, is also transcriptionally regulated and is bound by PhoP. The binding affinity for phosphorylated PhoP was about 10-fold higher than that for unphosphorylated PhoP. Both unphosphorylated and phosphorylated PhoP bound upstream of the -20 region in the tuaA promoter. By aligning the PhoP-binding sites within the Pho-regulon promoters, a consensus core PhoP-binding region composed of four TT(A/T)ACA direct repeats, each separated by 5 +/- 2 non-conserved nucleotides was identified. PhoP, phosphorylated or unphosphorylated, binds to such a sequence in all Pho-regulon promoters studied. Phosphorylated PhoP binds to the core binding region with high affinity and to additional regions surrounding this region with similar or lower affinity.    A physical map of the chromosome of Oenococcus oeni PSU-1 was constructed. This represents the first map for a strain of this species. A total of 37 restriction sites for the rare-cutting endonucleases Ascl, Fsel, Notl and Sfil were mapped on the chromosome, which was found to be circular with an estimated size of 1857 kb. Fragment order was determined using several approaches: analysis of partial and double digestions, two-dimensional pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, isolation of linking clones, and Southern hybridization with labelled restriction fragments both from PSU-1 and from O. oeni strain GM. Oenococcal genes alsS/alsD, mleA and mir, two phage attachment sites and recurrent sequences such as IS1165-like elements and rrn loci were located on the physical map. Specific fragments hybridizing with gene probes from Lactococcus lactis, Leuconostoc mesenteroides and Bacillus subtilis were also identified. The two ribosomal operons have been precisely located and their transcription direction determined.    A new Bacillus subtilis sporulation-specific gene, yhcN, has been identified, the expression of which is dependent on the forespore-specific sigma factor sigmaG and to a much lesser extent on sigmaF. A translational yhcN-lacZ fusion is expressed at a very high level in the forespore, and the protein encoded by yhcN was detected in the inner spore membrane. A yhcN mutant sporulates normally and yhcN spores have identical resistance properties to wild-type spores. However, the outgrowth of yhcN spores is slower than that of wild-type spores.    The general stress response of the Gram-positive soil bacterium Bacillus subtilis is controlled by the sigma B transcription factor. sigma B activity is regulated by the newly discovered partner switching mechanism of signal transduction, which integrates the two different classes of challenges which posttranslationally activate sigma B: environmental stress and energy stress. Our investigation of a possible sigma B homologue in the related soil bacterium B. licheniformis had two goals. First, this study would contribute to understanding the distribution of the sigma B general stress system among Gram-positive bacteria. Second, a phylogenetic comparison of regulatory systems can supplement genetic and biochemical analysis by revealing conserved features that are critical for function. We report here that (1) B. licheniformis cells contain a protein that closely resembles B. subtilis sigma B in size and antigenic properties; (2) the level of this potential sigma B homologue rapidly increases following environmental or energy stress; and (3) the B. licheniformis genome encodes a homologue of the sigB general stress operon, including the sigma B structural gene and seven rsb regulatory genes. Based on these results, B. licheniformis possesses a general stress system likely regulated by two coupled partner switching modules that sense and integrate the two broad classes of activating stress signals.    CO2 regulates gene expression across a diverse group of microorganisms including fungi, and both photosynthetic and non photosynthetic bacteria. The processes that CO2 regulates are diverse. Several CO2-responsive random promoter lacZ fusions of unknown function have been isolated from a marine Synechococcus and a Pseudoalteromonas sp., highlighting the wide effect of CO2 control in these organisms. Regulatory proteins have been described that mediate the CO2 response at transcription level in Bacillus anthracis, the group A streptococci and two Rhodobacter spp. These regulatory proteins include: AcpA and AtxA that are involved in CO2 control of B. anthracis capsule and toxin production; Mga that regulates surface associated virulence factors in the group A streptococci; and RegB/A, a two component signal transduction system that responds to environmental stimuli including CO2, to regulate photosynthetic apparatus and CO2 fixation enzyme synthesis in Rhodobacter spp.    The development of genetic competence in Bacillus subtilis is regulated by a complex signal transduction cascade, which leads to the synthesis of the competence transcription factor (CTF). Previous studies suggested that CTF is encoded by comK. ComK is required for the transcription of comK itself, as well as of the late competence genes encoding the DNA uptake machinery and of genes required for homologous recombination. Here, we used purified ComK to study its role in transcription and to determine the DNA recognition sequence for ComK. In vitro transcription from the comG promoter, which depends on ComK in vivo, was observed on the addition of purified ComK together with Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase, proving that ComK is CTF. To determine the DNA sequences involved in ComK recognition, footprinting analysis was performed with promoter fragments of the CTF-dependent genes: comC, comE, comF, comG, comK, and addAB. The ComK binding sites determined by DNase I protection experiments were unusually long, with average lengths of approximately 65 bp, and displayed only weak sequence similarities. Hydroxy-radical footprinting, performed with the addAB promoter, revealed a unique arrangement of four short A/T-rich sequences. Gel retardation experiments indicated that four molecules of ComK bound the addAB promoter and the dyad symmetrical arrangement of the four A/T-rich sequences implied that ComK functions as a tetramer composed of two dimers each recognizing the motif AAAAN5TTTT. Comparable A/T-rich sequences were identified in all six DNase I footprints and could be used to predict ComK targets in the B. subtilis genome. On the basis of the variability in distance between the ComK-dimer binding sites, ComK-regulated promoters could be divided into three classes, demonstrating a remarkable flexibility in the binding of ComK.The pattern of hydroxy-radical protections suggested that ComK binds at one face of the DNA helix through the minor groove. This inference was strengthened by the observation that minor groove binding drugs inhibited the binding of ComK.    By sequencing the DNA regions which flank the intG gene encoding integrase of the temperate Lactobacillus (Lb.) gasseri bacteriophage phiadh, a continuous sequence of 6590 bp was established. It encompasses five newly identified ORFs, of which four are located upstream, and one (orfC) downstream of intG. Proteins corresponding to the expected products of the intG upstream coding regions, orfA (33 kDa), orf2 (14 kDa), rad (12.1 kDa), and tec (7.9 kDa), were identified by in vitro expression of subcloned DNA fragments. Rad shares homology with transcription regulators, including SinR of Bacillus species and the repressor of phage phi105. The gporf2 is similar to predicted products of topologically equivalent coding regions of the Lactococcus lactis phage TP901-1 and the B. subtilis phage phi105. Promoters for the divergently oriented rad and tec genes were mapped within the 435-bp region between them and specify overlapping transcripts with extended 5&apos;-untranslated sequences. As shown with lacZ fusions, Rad repressed transcription from the tec and rad promoters 20- and 5-fold, respectively. In Lb. gasseri, weak expression of cloned rad ws sufficient to mediate immunity towards phiadh.    We previously showed [Q. Liang, A.J. Fulco, J. Biol. Chem., 270 (1995) 18606-18614) that the binding of Bm3R1 repressor to Barbie box elements and operator sites in the 5&apos;-flanking regions of the P450BM-3 and P450BM-1 (CYP102 and CYP106) genes in Bacillus megaterium was a critical factor in their regulation at the level of transcription. We now describe experiments that delineate specific roles for Bm3R1 in the barbiturate-mediated induction of these genes. We directly demonstrate the interaction of Bm3R1 with Barbie box and operator sequences and show that high in vivo levels of Bm3R1 prevent putative positive factors from binding to Barbie box elements, strongly inhibit the expression of the P450 genes, prolong the lag phase of growth in Bacillus megaterium cultures and increase the sensitivity of the cells to the growth-inhibitory effects of barbiturates. Finally, our data suggest that there may be two forms of Bm3R1, either of which can interact with OIII, the bicistronic operator sequence. Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science B.V.    Expression of the Bacillus subtilis glpD gene which encodes glycerol-3-phosphate (G3P) dehydrogenase is regulated by the GlpP protein which, in the presence of G3P, causes antitermination of transcription of glpD. The glpD gene leader fused to lacZ was integrated into the chromosome of Escherichia coli deleted for the lac operon and carrying the B. subtilis glpP gene on a plasmid. beta-Galactosidase activity of this strain was increased by the addition of G3P. When G3P and glucose, glucose-6-phosphate or fructose-6-phosphate were added, beta-galactosidase activity was reduced showing that GlpP mediates catabolite repression of transcription from the glpD leader in the absence of any other B. subtilis protein.    Regulatory protein p4, encoded by Bacillus subtilis phage phi 29, has proved to be a very useful model to analyze the molecular mechanisms of transcription regulation. Protein p4 modulates the transcription of phage phi 29 genome by activating the late A3 promoter (PA3) and simultaneously repressing the two main early promoters, A2b and A2c (or PA2b and PA2c). This review describes in detail the regulatory mechanism leading to activation or repression, and discusses them in the context of the recent findings on the role of the RNA polymerase alpha subunit in transcription regulation. Activation of PA3 implies the p4-mediated stabilization of RNA polymerase at the promoter as a closed complex. Repression of the early A2b promoter occurs by binding of protein p4 to a site that partially overlaps the -35 consensus region of the promoter, therefore preventing the binding of RNA polymerase to the promoter. Repression of the A2c promoter, located 96 bp downstream from PA2b, occurs by a different mechanism that implies the simultaneous binding of protein p4 and RNA polymerase to the promoter in such a way that promoter clearance is inhibited. Interestingly, activation of PA3 and repression of PA2c require an interaction between protein p4 and RNA polymerase, and in both cases this interaction occurs between the same surface of protein p4 and the C-terminal domain of the alpha subunit of RNA polymerase, which provides new insights into how a protein can activate or repress transcription by subtle variations in the protein-DNA complexes formed at promoters.    Bacillus subtilis PhoP and PhoR, a pair of two-component regulatory proteins, regulate the phosphate starvation response. Here, we used two other pho regulon promoters, the phoA and pstS promoters, to examine the mechanism of PhoP-specific activation of its target promoters. Both gel shift and DNase I footprinting assays indicate that PhoP bound to the two promoters. Unphosphorylated PhoP bound only to the multiple TTAACA-like sequences upstream of these two promoters, while phosphorylated PhoP extended the binding region in both the 5&apos; and the 3&apos; direction and, additionally, protected sequences internal to the coding region of these two genes. The PhoP binding sites in the coding region were necessary for full induction from either promoter during phosphate starvation. Deletion of these sites eliminated approximately 75% and 45% of the induced promoter activity of the phoA and pstS promoters respectively. In vitro transcription assays using the phoA promoters with various 3&apos; ends confirmed the requirement of the PhoP-P binding to the coding region for full promoter activity. The multiple TTAACA-like sequences in the phoA and pstS promoters were essential for promoter activity, and deletion of one or more of these sequences in either promoter eliminated the promoter activity. Two pairs of TTAACA-like sequences were required for efficient PhoP binding and were suggested to be one B. subtilis Pho box. Based on our data, we have proposed a model for activation of the phoA and the pstS promoter by PhoP.    A detailed transcriptional analysis of the conjugative transposon Tn916 was carried out, which revealed that transcription of the transfer functions requires excision of the element and dramatically increases in the presence of tetracycline. The key components of this regulatory system are two contiguous transposon-borne genes, orf7 and orf8, located downstream from and having the same polarity of transcription as the tetracycline resistance determinant tetM. The gene orf7 encodes a 140-amino-acid (aa) protein exhibiting limited homology with sigmaF of Bacillus subtilis, whereas orf8 encodes a 76-aa peptide that does not share any sequence homology with any cognate proteins. In the presence of tetracycline, an attenuation mechanism enables the transcription of orf7 and orf8 from the tetM promoter. The resulting increased synthesis of ORF7 and ORF8 activates the promoter Porf7 located upstream from orf7, which then directs the expression of the transfer functions in the transposon circular intermediate through long transcripts encompassing the attachment site. The apparently non-regulated promoter Pxis located upstream of the excisionase encoding gene xis could also participate in the expression of the tra genes. We also demonstrate that Tn916 carries another regulated promoter, Porf9, which directs transcription of a single gene, orf9, located downstream from and transcribed counterclockwise to tetM. This gene encodes a 117-aa putative transcriptional repressor, but the exact role of this protein in the mobility of Tn916, as well as the regulation of its expression, remains to be elucidated. Our results constitute the molecular basis for the observation that tetracycline increased the transfer frequency of this type of element.    The regulation of the recA gene expression in the obligately anaerobic rumen bacterium Prevotella ruminicola was investigated by monitoring the recA-specific transcript level. P. ruminicola recA forms a monocistronic unit, but no SOS-box sequences resembling those of Escherichia coli or Bacillus subtilis can be identified upstream of the recA coding region. At the same time, we observed a fivefold increase in the level of recA mRNA in response to DNA damaging agents, mitomycin C and methyl methanesulfonate, as well as under conditions of oxidative stress. No induction was detected when growth of P. ruminicola was arrested by shifting to acidic (pH 4.8) conditions. Primer extension experiment revealed the three very close transcriptional start sites for recA. The putative -10 and -35 RNA polymerase binding regions were proposed on the basis of transcript mapping. These regions bear very little similarity to the E. coli (sigma70) and B. subtilis (sigmaA) consensus sequences, as well as to the recognition sites of other minor sigma-factors. Transcript mapping experiments in E. coli expressing P. ruminicola recA confirmed that the transcription machineries of these two bacteria recognize completely different regulatory sequences on the template to initiate transcription. Preliminary DNase I footprinting analysis data revealed that the region of imperfect dyad symmetry (AATTATAATCAATTATAAAT) found between the putative -10 region and the translation initiation codon may serve as an SOS-box-like regulatory sequence in P. ruminicola. This sequence bears no similarity to the known SOS-box sequences and, in particular, to that of E. coli and other Gram-negative bacteria.    The Bacillus subtilis strain 168 chromosomal region extending from 109 degrees to 112 degrees has been sequenced. Among the 35 ORFs identified, cotT and rapA were the only genes that had been previously mapped and sequenced. Out of ten ORFs belonging to a single putative transcription unit, seven are probably involved in hexuronate catabolism. Their sequences are homologous to Escherichia coli genes exuT, uidB, uxaA, uxaB, uxaC, uxuA and uxuB, which are all required for the uptake of free D-glucuronate, D-galacturonate and beta-glucuronide, and their transformation into glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and pyruvate via 2-keto-3-deoxygluconate. The remaining three ORFs encode two dehydrogenases and a transcriptional regulator. The operon is preceded by a putative catabolite-responsive element (CRE), located between a hypothetical promoter and the RBS of the first gene. This element, the longest and the only so far described that is fully symmetrical, consists of a 26 bp palindrome matching the theoretical B. subtilis CRE sequence. The remaining predicted amino acid sequences that share homologies with other proteins comprise: a cytochrome P-450, a glycosyltransferase, an ATP-binding cassette transporter, a protein similar to the formate dehydrogenase alpha-subunit (FdhA), protein similar to NADH dehydrogenases, and three homologues of polypeptides that have undefined functions.    A reverse transcription (RT)-PCR assay targeting the 16S rRNA of Mycobacterium leprae was developed to detect the organism in clinical specimens. A 171-bp fragment was amplified when M. leprae RNA was used as a template but not when a panel of RNAs from 28 potentially cross-reacting mycobacterial species, seven genera related to Mycobacterium, and three organisms normally found among skin or nose flora were tested. As few as 10 organisms isolated from infected tissue could be detected, confirming the sensitivity of the assay. When the test was applied to clinical specimens, M. leprae was detected in 82% of skin biopsy specimens obtained from untreated leprosy patients, while skin biopsy specimens from healthy volunteers and patients with other dermatological disorders were negative. The sensitivity of the RT-PCR was higher than that of slit skin smear staining for acid-fast bacilli or acid-fast staining of fixed biopsy specimens since 53% of acid-fast bacillus-negative biopsy specimens were RT-PCR positive. Because 16S rRNA is rapidly degraded upon cell death, the assay may detect only viable organisms and may prove to be useful in assessing the efficacy of chemotherapy.    Pro-sigmaK is the inactive precursor of sigmaK, a mother cell-specific sigma factor responsible for the transcription of late sporulation genes of Bacillus subtilis. Upon subcellular fractionation, the majority of the pro-sigmaK was present in the membrane fraction. The rest of the pro-sigmaK was in a large complex that did not contain RNA polymerase core subunits. In contrast, the majority of the sigmaK was associated with core RNA polymerase. Virtually identical fractionation properties were observed when pro-sigmaE was analyzed. Pro-sigmaK was completely solubilized from the membrane fraction and the large complex by Triton X-100 and was partially solubilized from the membrane fraction by NaCl and KSCN. The membrane association of pro-sigmaK did not require spoIVF gene products, which appear to be located in the mother cell membrane that surrounds the forespore, and govern pro-sigmaK processing in the mother cell. Furthermore, pro-sigmaK associated with the membrane when overproduced in vegetative cells. Overproduction of pro-sigmaK in sporulating cells resulted in more pro-sigmaK in the membrane fraction. In agreement with the results of cell fractionation experiments, immunofluorescence microscopy showed that pro-sigmaK was localized to the mother cell membranes that surround the mother cell and the forespore in sporulating wild-type cells and mutant cells that do not process pro-sigmaK. Treatment of extracts with 0.6 M KCl appeared to free most of the pro-sigmaK and sigmaK from other cell constituents. After salt removal, sigmaK, but not pro-sigmaK, reassociated with exogenous core RNA polymerase to form holoenzyme. These results suggest that the prosequence inhibits RNA polymerase core binding and targets pro-sigmaK to the membrane, where it may interact with the processing machinery.    The activity of the sporulation transcription factor sigmaE in Bacillus subtilis is governed by an intercellular signal transduction pathway that controls the conversion of the inactive proprotein pro-sigmaE to the mature and active form of the factor. Here I use immunofluorescence microscopy to show that the activation of the proprotein is associated with its progression through three patterns of subcellular localization. In the predivisional sporangium, pro-sigmaE was found to be associated with the cytoplasmic membrane. Next, at the stage of asymmetric division, pro-sigmaE accumulated at the sporulation septum. Finally, after processing, mature sigmaE was found to be distributed throughout the mother cell cytoplasm. The results of subcellular fractionation and sedimentation in density gradients of extracts prepared from postdivisional sporangia confirmed that pro-sigmaE was chiefly present in the membrane fraction and that sigmaE was predominantly cytoplasmic, findings that suggest that the pro-amino acid sequence is responsible for the sequestration of pro-sigmaE to the membrane. The results of chemical cross-linking experiments showed that pro-sigmaE was present in a complex with its putative processing protein, SpoIIGA, or with a protein that depended on SpoIIGA. The membrane association of pro-sigmaE was, however, independent of SpoIIGA and other proteins specific to B. subtilis. Likewise, accumulation of pro-sigmaE at the septum did not depend on its interaction with SpoIIGA. Sequestration of pro-sigmaE to the membrane might serve to facilitate its interaction with SpoIIGA and may be important for preventing its premature association with core RNA polymerase. The implications of these findings for the compartmentalization of sigmaE are discussed.    Endospores of Bacillus subtilis are enclosed in a proteinaceous coat which can be differentiated into a thick, striated outer layer and a thinner, lamellar inner layer. We found that the N-terminal sequence of a 25-kDa protein present in a preparation of spore coat proteins matched that of the Mn-dependent superoxide dismutase (SOD) encoded by the sod4 locus. sod4 is transcribed throughout the growth and sporulation of a wild-type strain and is responsible for the SOD activity detected in total cell extracts prepared from B. subtilis. Disruption of the sod4 locus produced a mutant that lacked any detectable SOD activity during vegetative growth and sporulation. The sodA mutant was not impaired in the ability to form heat- or lysozyme-resistant spores. However, examination of the coat layers of sodA mutant spores revealed increased extractability of the tyrosine-rich outer coat protein CotG. We showed that this condition was not accompanied by augmented transcription of the cotG gene in sporulating cells of the sodA mutant. We conclude that SodA is required for the assembly of CotG into the insoluble matrix of the spore and suggest that CotG is covalently cross-linked into the insoluble matrix by an oxidative reaction dependent on SodA. Ultrastructural analysis revealed that the inner coat formed by a sodA mutant was incomplete. Moreover, the outer coat lacked the characteristic striated appearance of wild-type spores, a pattern that was accentuated in a cotG mutant. These observations suggest that the SodA-dependent formation of the insoluble matrix containing CotG is largely responsible for the striated appearance of this coat layer.    The Bm1P1 protein was previously proposed to act as a positive transcription factor involved in barbiturate-mediated induction of cytochrome P450BM-1 in Bacillus megaterium. We now report that the bm1P1 gene encodes a protein of 217 amino acids, rather than the 98 amino acids as reported previously. In vitro gel shift assays indicate that the Bm1P1 protein did not interact with probes comprising the regulatory regions of the P450BM-1 gene. Moreover, disruption of the bm1P1 gene did not markedly affect barbiturate induction of P450BM-1 expression. A multicopy plasmid harboring only the P450BM-1 promoter region could increase expression of the chromosome-encoded P450BM-1. The level of expression is comparable with that shown by a multicopy plasmid harboring the P450BM-1 promoter region along with the bm1P1 gene. These results strongly suggest that the Bm1P1 protein is unlikely to act as a positive regulator for barbiturate induction of P450BM-1 expression. Finally, deletion of the Barbie box did not markedly diminish the effect of pentobarbital on expression of a reporter gene transcriptionally fused to the P450BM-1 promoter. This suggests that the Barbie box is unlikely to be a key element in barbiturate-mediated induction of P450BM-1.    Several bacterial genomes exhibit preference for G over C on the DNA leading strand extending from the origin of replication to the ter-region in the genomes of Escherichia coli, Mycoplasma genitalium, Bacillus subtilis, and marginally in Haemophilus influenzae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and Helicobacter pylori. Strand compositional asymmetry is not observed in the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. genome nor in the archaeal genomes of Methanococcus jannaschii, Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum, and Archaeoglobus fulgidus. A strong strand compositional asymmetry is observed in beta-type but not alpha- or gamma-type human herpesviruses featuring G &gt; C downstream of oriL and C &gt; G upstream of oriL. Dinucleotide relative abundances (i.e., dinucleotide representations normalized by the component nucleotide frequencies) are consonant with respect to the leading and lagging strands. Strand compositional asymmetry may reflect on differences in replication synthesis of the leading versus lagging strand, on differences between template and coding strand associated with transcription-coupled repair mechanisms, on differences in gene density between the two strands, on differences in residue and codon biases in relation to gene function, expression level, or operon organization, or on differences in single or context-dependent base mutational rates. The absence of strand asymmetry in the archaeal genomes may reflect the presence of multiple origins of replication.    Gut proteinases are involved in the solubilization and activation of insecticidal toxins produced by Bacillus thuringiensis and may also be involved in resistance development. Approximately threefold lower chymotrypsin-like enzyme activity was observed in a Bt(entomocidus)-resistant strain of the Indianmeal moth, Plodia interpunctella, than that in the Bt-susceptible strain. Because chymotrypsin-like proteinases are involved in Bt protoxin activation in P. interpunctella, we compared cDNA sequences, mRNA expression levels, and genomic DNA for chymotrypsin-like enzymes in Bt-susceptible and Bt-resistant strains of P. interpunctella. To isolate cDNA coding for chymotrypsinogen-like proteinases, a probe was developed using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of a cDNA library from the Bt-susceptible strain using a vector primer and a degenerate primer corresponding to a conserved sequence in the active site of serine proteinases. This probe was used to screen cDNA libraries from resistant and susceptible strains. Predicted amino acid sequences from cDNA clones of each strain share similarity with sequences of chymotrypsin-like proteinases and are most similar to a chymotrypsin-like proteinase from the tobacco hornworm, Manduca sexta. cDNAs for putative chymotrypsinogen-like proteins, from both Bt-susceptible and Bt-resistant strains of P. interpunctella share an identical open reading frame of 846 nucleotides. The encoded proteins contain amino acid sequence motifs of serine proteinase active sites, disulfide-bridge cysteine residues, and both zymogen activation and signal peptides. A difference between these cDNAs was observed only in the untranslated region where a substitution of guanine for adenine occurred in the Bt-resistant strain. Southern and Northern blotting analyses indicated that there are no major differences in chymotrypsinogen-like genomic organization and mRNA expression in the two strains. These data suggest that chymotrypsinogen-like proteinase genes and their transcription are similar in the Bt-susceptible and Bt-resistant strains of P. interpunctella.    The gene for the vegetative sigma factor A of Clostridium acetobutylicum was constitutively transcribed during growth and formed an operon together with dnaE. Sporulation-specific sigma factors E, G, and K were sequentially induced shortly before mature endospores could be detected. Maximal transcription in the course of spore formation was found to be in the order sigE-sigG-sigK, thus matching the pattern described for Bacillus subtilis. From primer extension experiments promoter structures could be deduced with high homology to the Bacillus consensus. Upstream of the spoIIGA-sigE operon a gene with significant similarity to ftsZ could be detected.    Bacillus subtilis is unable to grow by consuming galactose because it is unable to transport it into the cell. The transcription of galE is not influenced by galactose but is repressed by glucose. Galactose is toxic for galE-negative bacteria because it results in elevated levels of metabolic intermediates. These negative effects are reduced in galK and galT mutants. Glucose is also toxic for galE-negative strains.    Recently, the DinR protein was established as the cellular repressor of the SOS response in the bacterium Bacillus subtilis. It is believed that DinR functions as the repressor by binding to a consensus sequence located in the promoter region of each SOS gene. The binding site for DinR is believed to be synonymous with the formerly identified Cheo box, a region of 12 bp displaying dyad symmetry (GAAC-N4-GTTC). Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed that highly purified DinR does bind to such sites located upstream of the dinA, dinB, dinC, and dinR genes. Furthermore, detailed mutational analysis of the B. subtilis recA operator indicates that some nucleotides are more important than others for maintaining efficient DinR binding. For example, nucleotide substitutions immediately 5&apos; and 3&apos; of the Cheo box as well as those in the N4 region appear to affect DinR binding. This data, combined with computational analyses of potential binding sites in other gram-positive organisms, yields a new consensus (DinR box) of 5&apos;-CGAACRNRYGTTYC-3&apos;. DNA footprint analysis of the B. subtilis dinR and recA DinR boxes revealed that the DinR box is centrally located within a DNA region of 31 bp that is protected from hydroxyl radical cleavage in the presence of DinR. Furthermore, while DinR is predominantly monomeric in solution, it apparently binds to the DinR box in a dimeric state.    Bacillus subtilis grown at 37 degrees C synthesizes saturated fatty acids with only traces of unsaturated fatty acids (UFAs). However, when cultures growing at 37 degrees C are transferred to 20 degrees C, UFA synthesis is induced. We report the identification and characterization of the gene encoding the fatty acid desaturase of B. subtilis. This gene, called des, was isolated by complementation of Escherichia coli strains with mutations in either of two different genes of UFA synthesis. The des gene encodes a polypeptide of 352 amino acid residues containing the three conserved histidine cluster motifs and two putative membrane-spanning domains characteristic of the membrane-bound desaturases of plants and cyanobacteria. Expression of the des gene in E. coli resulted in desaturation of palmitic acid moieties of the membrane phospholipids to give the novel mono-UFA cis-5-hexadecenoic acid, indicating that the B. subtilis des gene product is a delta5 acyl-lipid desaturase. The des gene was disrupted, and the resulting null mutant strains were unable to synthesize UFAs upon a shift to low growth temperatures. The des null mutant strain grew as well as its congenic parent at 20 or 37 degrees C but showed severely reduced survival during stationary phase. Analysis of operon fusions in which the des promoter directed the synthesis of a lacZ reporter gene showed that des expression is repressed at 37 degrees C, but a shift of cultures from 37 to 20 degrees C resulted in a 10- to 15-fold increase in transcription. This is the first report of a membrane phospholipid desaturase in a nonphotosynthetic organism and the first direct evidence for cold induction of a desaturase.    Previous work has shown that the katX gene encodes the major catalase in dormant spores of Bacillus subtilis but that this enzyme has no role in dormant spore resistance to hydrogen peroxide. Expression of a katX-lacZ fusion began at approximately h 2 of sporulation, and &gt;75% of the katX-driven beta-galactosidase was packaged into the mature spore. A mutation in the gene coding for the sporulation-specific RNA polymerase sigma factor sigmaF abolished katX-lacZ expression, while mutations in genes encoding sigmaE, sigmaG, and sigmaK did not. Induction of sigmaF synthesis in vegetative cells also resulted in katX-lacZ expression, while induction of sigmaG expression did not; the katX-lacZ fusion was also not induced by hydrogen peroxide. Upstream of the in vivo katX transcription start site there are sequences with good homology to those upstream of known sigmaF-dependent start sites. These data indicate that katX is an additional member of the forespore-specific sigmaF regulon. A mutant in the katA gene, encoding the major catalase in growing cells, was sensitive to hydrogen peroxide during sporulation, while a katX mutant was not. However, outgrowth of katX spores, but not katA spores, was sensitive to hydrogen peroxide. Consequently, a major function for KatX is to protect germinating spores from hydrogen peroxide.    PURPOSE: Dendritic cells are the most potent antigen presenting cells capable of initiating antitumor immune responses. We previously showed that bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) stimulates cultured human dendritic cells. We extended these studies and tested the ability of cultured human dendritic cells to express interleukin IL-8 in response to BCG. We also investigated the T cell stimulatory potential of BCG treated dendritic cells in mixed leukocyte reactions. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Dendritic cells were obtained by culturing plastic adherent mononuclear cells from peripheral blood for 6 days in the presence of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and IL-4. Spontaneous and BCG stimulated IL-8 protein release into culture supernatants was measured by a quantitative immunoassay. IL-8 gene transcription was assessed by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Untreated and BCG exposed dendritic cells were compared as stimulators of allogeneic T cell proliferation, measured as [3H]thymidine incorporation. RESULTS: BCG stimulated IL-8 messenger ribonucleic acid expression and IL-8 protein release. IL-8 secretion occurred in a dose and time dependent fashion. BCG induced IL-8 release was further enhanced in the presence of indomethacin. BCG treated dendritic cells were much more potent T cell stimulators than untreated dendritic cells. CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that BCG enhances the production of IL-8, a potent chemokine of T cells and granulocytes, as well as the T cell stimulatory potential of human dendritic cells.    BACKGROUND: The expression of pyrimidine nucleotide biosynthetic (pyr) genes in Bacillus subtilis is regulated by transcriptional attenuation. The PyrR attenuation protein binds to specific sites in pyr mRNA, allowing the formation of downstream terminator structures. UMP and 5-phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate (PRPP), a nucleotide metabolite, are co-regulators with PyrR. The smallest RNA shown to bind tightly to PyrR is a 28-30 nucleotide stem-loop that contains a purine-rich bulge and a putative-GNRA tetraloop. PyrR is also a uracil phosphoribosyltransferase (UPRTase), although the relationship between enzymatic activity and RNA recognition is unclear, and the UPRTase activity of PyrR is not physiologically significant in B. subtilis. Elucidating the role of PyrR structural motifs in UMP-dependent RNA binding is an important step towards understanding the mechanism of pyr transcriptional attenuation. RESULTS: The 1.6 A crystal structure of B. subtilis PyrR has been determined by multiwavelength anomalous diffraction, using a Sm co-crystal. As expected, the structure of PyrR is homologous to those proteins of the large type I PRTase structural family; it is most similar to hypoxanthine-guanine-xanthine PRTase (HGXPRTase). The PyrR dimer differs from other PRTase dimers, suggesting it may have evolved specifically for RNA binding. A large, basic, surface at the dimer interface is an obvious RNA-binding site and uracil specificity is probably provided by hydrogen bonds from mainchain and sidechain atoms in the hood subdomain. These models of RNA and UMP binding are consistent with biological data. CONCLUSIONS: The B. subtilis protein PyrR has adapted the substrate- and product-binding capacities of a PRTase, probably an HGXPRTase, producing a new regulatory function in which the substrate and product are co-regulators of transcription termination. The structure is consistent with the idea that PyrR regulatory function is independent of catalytic activity, which is likely to be extremely low under physiological conditions.    The sporulation transcription factor sigmaK of Bacillus subtilis is controlled by a signal transduction pathway that operates at the level of the proteolytic processing of the inactive precursor protein pro-sigmaK. The conversion of pro-sigmaK to sigmaK requires the putative processing enzyme SpoIVFB and is governed by the regulatory proteins SpoIVFA and BofA. We engineered vegetative cells to carry out processing of pro-sigmaK by inducing the synthesis of the proprotein, a modified form of the putative processing enzyme, and its two regulators during growth. The results showed that (i) modified SpoIVFB was the only sporulation protein necessary to achieve processing of pro-sigmaK; (ii) SpoIVFA stimulated processing, apparently by protecting the processing enzyme from degradation; (iii) BofA inhibited processing in a manner that did not involve degradation of SpoIVFB; and (iv) the inhibition of SpoIVFB by BofA was dependent on SpoIVFA. We conclude that BofA and SpoIVFA act synergistically and are the only two sporulation proteins needed to inhibit the function of SpoIVFB. Our results are consistent with the idea that activation of pro-sigmaK occurs by a reversal of the BofA/SpoIVFA-mediated inhibition of the processing enzyme.    Thioredoxin, a small, ubiquitous protein which participates in redox reactions through the reversible oxidation of its active center dithiol to a disulfide, is an essential protein in Bacillus subtilis. A variety of stresses, including heat or salt stress or ethanol treatment, strongly enhanced the synthesis of thioredoxin in B. subtilis. The stress induction of the monocistronic trxA gene encoding thioredoxin occurs at two promoters. The general stress sigma factor, sigmaB, was required for the initiation of transcription at the upstream site, S(B), and the promoter preceding the downstream start site, S(A), was presumably recognized by the vegetative sigma factor, sigmaA. In contrast to the heat-inducible, sigmaA-dependent promoters preceding the chaperone-encoding operons groESL and dnaK, no CIRCE (for controlling inverted repeat of chaperone expression) was present in the vicinity of the start site, S(A). The induction patterns of the promoters differed, with the upstream promoter displaying the typical stress induction of sigmaB-dependent promoters. Transcription initiating at S(A), but not at S(B), was also induced after treatment with hydrogen peroxide or puromycin. Such a double control of stress induction at two different promoters seems to be typical of a subgroup of class III heat shock genes of B. subtilis, like clpC, and it either allows the cells to raise the level of the antioxidant thioredoxin after oxidative stress or allows stressed cells to accumulate thioredoxin. These increased levels of thioredoxin might help stressed B. subtilis cells to maintain the native and reduced state of cellular proteins.    As a soil bacterium also found in estuarine and marine habitats, Bacillus subtilis has evolved various sensing and adaptation systems in order to face salt stress conditions. Among these regulatory mechanisms is the DegS-DegU signal transduction system, which was previously shown to be stimulated by high salt concentrations. A search for promoters regulated in response to salt stress led to the identification of wapA, encoding a wall-associated protein, which is strongly expressed at low salt concentrations and almost completely repressed in the presence of 0.7 M disodium succinate. Repression of wapA transcription by salt stress was shown to require the phosphorylated form of DegU. Moreover, DegU-mediated repression of wapA occurred only in high-salt medium. Alignment between the control region of wapA and other DegU-regulated promoters allowed the identification of a putative DegU target sequence, AGAAN(11)TTCAG. Mutation/deletion analyses of the wapA promoter region confirmed the role of the putative DegU control site in repression of wapA transcription at high salt concentrations and revealed a second site of repression located downstream from the transcription start site. Since residual negative control was observed at this second site in the absence of DegU, it seems likely that an additional repressor acts on the wapA control region to further downregulate wapA transcription under salt stress conditions.    SigmaE is a mother cell-specific transcription factor of sporulating Bacillus subtilis that is derived from an inactive precursor protein (pro-sigmaE). To examine the process that prevents sigmaE activity from developing in the forespore, we fused the sigmaE structural gene (sigE) to forespore-specific promoters (PdacF and PspoIIIG), placed these fusions at sites on the B. subtilis chromosome which translocate into the forespore either early or late, and used Western blot analysis to monitor SigE accumulation and pro-sigmaE processing. sigE alleles, placed at sites which entered the forespore early, were found to generate more protein product than the same fusion placed at a late entering site. SigE accumulation and processing in the forespore were enhanced by null mutations in spoIIIE, a gene whose product is essential for translocation of the distal portion of the B. subtilis chromosome into the forespore. In other experiments, a chimera of pro-sigmaE and green fluorescence protein, previously shown to be unprocessed if it is synthesized within the forespore, was found to be processed in this compartment if coexpressed with the gene for the pro-sigmaE-processing enzyme, SpoIIGA. The need for spoIIGA coexpression is obviated in the absence of SpoIIIE. We interpret these results as evidence that selective degradation of both SigE and SpoIIGA prevent mature sigmaE from accumulating in the forespore compartment of wild-type B. subtilis. Presumably, a gene(s) located at a site that is distal to the origin of chromosome transfer is responsible for this phenomenon when it is translocated and expressed in the forespore.    The Bacillus subtilis skin element confers resistance to arsenate and arsenite. The ars operon in the skin element contains four genes in the order arsR, ORF2, arsB, and arsC. Three of these genes are homologous to the arsR, arsB, and arsC genes from the staphylococcal plasmid pI258, while no homologs of ORF2 have been found. Inactivation of arsR, arsB, or arsC results in either constitutive expression of ars, an arsenite- and arsenate-sensitive phenotype, or an arsenate-sensitive phenotype, respectively. These results suggest that ArsR, ArsB, and ArsC function as a negative regulator, a membrane-associated protein need for extrusion of arsenite, and arsenate reductase, respectively. Expression of the ars operon was induced by arsenate, arsenite, and antimonite. Northern hybridization and primer extension analysis showed that synthesis of a full-length ars transcript of about 2.4 kb was induced by arsenate and that the ars promoter contains sequences that resemble the -10 and -35 regions of promoters that are recognized by E sigmaA.    CYP102 (Cytochrome P450BM-3) is induced in Bacillus megaterium by barbiturates, peroxisome proliferators, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. We now describe the induction of CYP102 in B. megaterium by 17 beta-estradiol and by 4-sec-butylphenol. These estrogens interact with the repressor protein Bm3R1, causing it to dissociate with the operator of the CYP102 gene and allowing transcription to occur. We have developed a stable transfection of a construct into B. megaterium of a truncated CYP102 gene coupled with the luciferase gene in a promoterless plasmid and have used this construct to test the induction of CYP102 by these estrogens. Estradiol demonstrated a dose-dependent induction of CYP102 which saturated at a 2-fold increase at 150 microM 4 hr post-addition. 4-sec-Butylphenol produced a dose-dependent and time-dependent induction up to 300 microM and 6 hr post-induction.    A Bacillus subtilis mutant that partially relieves carbon catabolite repression (CCR) of the hut operon was isolated by transposon mutagenesis. Characterization of this mutant revealed that the transposon had inserted into the gene, mfd, that encodes transcription-repair coupling factor. The Mfd protein is known to promote strand-specific DNA repair by displacing RNA polymerase stalled at a nucleotide lesion and directing the (A)BC excinuclease to the DNA damage site. A set of transcriptional lacZ fusions was used to demonstrate that the mfd mutation relieves CCR of hut and gnt expression at the cis-acting cre sequences located downstream of the transcriptional start site but does not affect CCR at sites located at the promoters. CCR of the amyE and bglPH genes, which contain cre sequences that overlap their promoters, is not altered by the mfd mutation. These results support a model in which the Mfd protein displaces RNA polymerase stalled at downstream cre sites that function as transcriptional roadblocks and reveal a new role for Mfd in cellular physiology.    The nucleotide sequence of the Bacillus subtilis clpP gene was determined. The predicted protein shows very high similarity to members of the ClpP family of proteolytic subunits (68% amino acid sequence identity with that of Escherichia coli). We show that ClpP plays an essential role in stationary phase adaptive responses. Indeed, a delta clpP mutant was constructed and shown to display a pleiotropic phenotype, including a deficiency in both sporulation initiation and competence for DNA uptake. The delta clpP mutant has a highly filamentous morphology and appears to be non-motile, as judged by swarm plate assays. Expression of clpP is strongly induced under heat shock conditions, and ClpP is shown to be essential for growth of B. subtilis at high temperature. The role of ClpP in the sporulation and competence regulatory pathways was investigated. ClpP is required for expression of the spollA and spollG operons, encoding the sigmaF and sigmaE sporulation-specific sigma factors. ClpP is also necessary for the expression of the comK gene, encoding a positive transcriptional regulator of competence genes. ComK-dependent transcription of sacB, encoding the exocellular degradative enzyme levansucrase, was found to be abolished in the delta clpP mutant. MecA has been characterized previously as a negative regulator of comK expression, whose overproduction inhibits both sporulation and competence development. Expression of a mecA&apos;-&apos;lacZ translational fusion is shown to be increased in the delta clpP mutant. We suggest that ClpP is involved in controlling MecA levels in the cell through proteolysis. Increased levels of MecA in the absence of ClpP are at least partly responsible for the observed pleiotropic phenotype of the delta clpP mutant.    We investigated the function and transcriptional regulation of ywcG. The protein is essential for Bacillus subtilis. Biochemical characterization of the protein revealed that it is an FMN-containing NADPH oxidase. ywcG is transcribed throughout the whole life cycle of B. subtilis. The start point of transcription is preceded by potential promoter sequences for sigmaA, sigmaB and sigmaD. A boost in transcription occurs at the beginning of stationary phase in complex media containing glutamate and glucose. The induction of transcription at the beginning of stationary phase needs the activity of a different alternative sigma-factor sigmaD. ywcG is, therefore, the first gene with a putative role in energy metabolism from B. subtilis that is transcribed in a sigmaD-dependent fashion, but its regulation is unique and the reverse of that described for all other sigmaD-dependent genes.    Bacillus subtilis PyrR has been shown to mediate transcriptional attenuation at three separate sites within the pyrimidine nucleotide biosynthetic (pyr) operon. Molecular genetic evidence suggests that regulation is achieved by PyrR binding to pyr mRNA. PyrR is also a uracil phosphoribosyltransferase (UPRTase). Recombinant PyrR was expressed in Escherichia coli, purified to homogeneity, physically and chemically characterized, and examined with respect to both of these activities. Mass spectroscopic characterization of PyrR demonstrated a monomeric mass of 20,263 Da. Gel filtration chromatography showed the native mass of PyrR to be dependent on protein concentration and suggested a rapid equilibrium between dimeric and hexameric forms. The UPRTase activity of PyrR has a pH optimum of 8.2. The Km value for uracil is very pH-dependent; the Km for uracil at pH 7.7 is 990 +/- 114 muM, which is much higher than for most UPRTases and may account for the low physiological activity of PyrR as a UPRTase. Using an electrophoretic mobility shift assay, PyrR was shown to bind pyr RNA that includes sequences from its predicted binding site in the second attenuator region. Binding of PyrR to pyr RNA was specific and UMP-dependent with apparent Kd values of 10 and 220 nM in the presence and absence of UMP, respectively. The concentration of UMP required for half-maximal stimulation of binding of PyrR to RNA was 6 muM. The results support a model for the regulation of pyr transcription whereby termination is governed by the UMP-dependent binding of PyrR to pyr RNA and provide purified and characterized PyrR for detailed biochemical studies of RNA binding and transcriptional attenuation.    Bacillus popilliae is an obligate pathogen for larvae of the insect family Scarabaeidae (Coleoptera). It forms parasporal crystals upon sporulation. The gene cry18Aa coding for the parasporal crystal protein and an upstream open reading frame, orf1, were previously isolated from B.popilliae. Here we report an analysis of cry18Aa transcription in Bacillus thuringiensis. The only transcriptional start site of cry18Aa was found 29 bp upstream of the open reading frame orf1, suggesting that orf1 and cry18Aa are transcribed as an operon. lacZ fusion to the cry18Aa promoter was used to follow the time-course of cry18Aa transcription in wild type B.thuringiensis and in various B.thuringiensis sporulation-deficient mutants (spo0A, sigE or sigK). In wild type B.thuringiensis, the cry18Aa promoter was activated 2 h after the end of exponential growth and the expression lasted to the late sporulation phase. The results of promoter activity in Spo+or Spo-backgrounds together with the results of primer extension experiments suggest that the transcription from this promoter can be driven by both sigmaE and sigmaK types of RNA polymerase at a single start site. The promoter region of cry18Aa operon fits the consensus sequences of both sigmaE and sigmaK dependent promoters of Bacillus.    A plasmid vector was designed, constructed, and used for the repeated retrieval of the bvgA gene from a number of Bordetella pertussis strains that, due to mutations in this gene, exhibited interesting phenotypes regarding the regulation of virulence genes. The vector was used in a scheme called allelic retrieval that exploits two cross-overs between cloned plasmid and native chromosomal sequences flanking the bvgA gene. This scheme is very similar to allelic exchange through the use of plasmid suicide vectors, but in the case presented here, the non-replicating plasmid that has received the chromosomal gene is recovered, rather than being allowed to be lost due to segregation. Incorporation of the counterselectable sacB gene of Bacillus subtilis in place of the plasmid copy of bvgA allows selection, after recovery in Escherichia coli, for only those plasmids that have retrieved the chromosomal bvgA gene. The validity of this approach was demonstrated by the retrieval of bvgA alleles with distinctive physical markers, as well as by the reintroduction of retrieved bvgA alleles to demonstrate that they conferred the expected phenotypes. It is expected that this approach will be applicable to the analysis of other genes in other bacterial species.    In this study, we cloned and sequenced a DNA fragment from an ordered cosmid library of Helicobacter pylori NCTC 11638 which confers to a siderophore synthesis mutant of Escherichia coli (EB53 aroB hemA) the ability to grow on iron-restrictive media and to reduce ferric iron. Sequence analysis of the DNA fragment revealed the presence of an open reading frame with high homology to the ribA gene of Bacillus subtilis. This gene encodes a bifunctional enzyme with the activities of both 3,4-dihydroxy-2-butanone 4-phosphate (DHBP) synthase and GTP cyclohydrolase II, which catalyze two essential steps in riboflavin biosynthesis. Expression of the gene (designated ribBA) resulted in the formation of one translational product, which was able to complement both the ribA and the ribB mutation in E. coli. Expression of ribBA was iron regulated, as was suggested by the presence of a putative FUR box in its promotor region and as shown by RNA dot blot analysis. Furthermore, we showed that production of riboflavin in H. pylori cells is iron regulated. E. coli EB53 containing the plasmid with H. pylori ribBA excreted riboflavin in the culture medium, and this riboflavin excretion also appeared to be iron regulated. We postulate that the iron-regulated production of riboflavin and ferric-iron-reduction activity by E. coli EB53 transformed with the H. pylori ribBA gene is responsible for the survival of EB53 on iron-restrictive medium. Because disruption of ribBA in H. pylori eliminates its ferric-iron-reduction activity, we conclude that ribBA has an important role in ferric-iron reduction and iron acquisition by H. pylori.    The expression of the srf operon of Bacillus subtilis, encoding surfactin synthetase and the competence regulatory protein ComS, was observed to be reduced when cells were grown in a rich glucose- and glutamine-containing medium in which late-growth culture pH was 5.0 or lower. The production of the surfactin synthetase subunits and of surfactin itself was also reduced. Raising the pH to near neutrality resulted in dramatic increases in srf expression and surfactin production. This apparent pH-dependent induction of srf expression required spo0K, which encodes the oligopeptide permease that functions in cell-density-dependent control of sporulation and competence, but not CSF, the competence-inducing pheromone that regulates srf expression in a Spo0K-dependent manner. Both ComP and ComA, the two-component regulatory pair that stimulates cell-density-dependent srf transcription, were required for optimal expression of srf at low and high pHs, but ComP was not required for pH-dependent srf induction. The known negative regulators of srf, RapC and CodY, were found not to function significantly in pH-dependent srf expression. Late-growth culture supernatants at low pH were not active in inducing srf expression in cells of low-density cultures but were rendered active when their pH was raised to near neutrality. ComQ (and very likely the srf-inducing pheromone ComX) and Spo0K were found to be required for the extracellular induction of srf-lacZ at neutral pH. The results suggest that srf expression, in response to changes in culture pH, requires Spo0K and another, as yet unidentified, extracellular factor. The study also provides evidence consistent with the hypothesis that ComP acts both positively and negatively in the regulation of ComA and that both activities are controlled by the ComX pheromone.    The predicted amino acid sequence of Bacillus subtilis ycbQ (renamed cwlJ) exhibits high similarity to those of the deduced C-terminal catalytic domain of SleBs, the specific cortex-hydrolyzing enzyme of B. cereus and the deduced one of B. subtilis. We constructed a cwlJ::lacZ fusion in the B. subtilis chromosome. The beta-galactosidase activity and results of Northern hybridization and primer extension analyses of the cwlJ gene indicated that it is transcribed by EsigmaE RNA polymerase. cwlJ-deficient spores responded to both L-alanine and AGFK, the A580 values of spore suspensions decreased more slowly than in the case of the wild-type strain, and the mutant spores released less dipicolinic acid than did those of the wild-type strain during germination. However, the mutant spores released only slightly less hexosamine than did the wild-type spores. In contrast, B. subtilis sleB spores did not release hexosamine at a significant level. While cwlJ and sleB spores were able to germinate, CJSB (cwlJ sleB) spores could not germinate but exhibited initial germination reactions, e.g., partial decrease in A580 and slow release of dipicolinic acid. CJSB spores became slightly gray after 6 h in the germinant, but their refractility was much greater than that of sleB mutant spores. The roles of the sleB and cwlJ mutations in germination and spore maturation are also discussed.    The genes mphA and mphB encode macrolide 2&apos;-phosphotransferases I and II, respectively, and they confer resistance to macrolide antibiotics in Escherichia coli. To study the expression of these genes in Gram-positive bacteria, we constructed recombinant plasmids that consisted of an mph gene and the pUB110 vector in Bacillus subtilis. When these plasmids were introduced into Staphylococcus aureus, the mphB gene was active and macrolide 2&apos;-phosphotransferase II was produced. The gene endowed S. aureus with high-level resistance to spiramycin, a macrolide antibiotic with a 16-membered ring. Moreover, transcription of the mphB gene in S. aureus began at the promoter that was active in E. coli.    The main bacteria in peaty, acid grassland soils in the Netherlands were investigated by ribosome isolation, temperature gradient gel electrophoresis, hybridization, cloning, and sequencing. Instead of using only 16S rDNA to determine the sequences present, we focused on rRNA to classify and quantify the most active bacteria. After direct ribosome isolation from soil, a partial amplicon of bacterial 16S rRNA was generated by reverse transcription-PCR. The sequence-specific separation by temperature gradient gel electrophoresis yielded soil-specific fingerprints, which were compared to signals from a clone library of genes coding for 16S rRNA. Cloned 16S rDNA sequences matching with intense bands in the fingerprint were sequenced. The relationships of the sequences to those of cultured organisms of known phylogeny were determined. Most of the amplicons originated from organisms closely related to Bacillus species. Such sequences were also detected by direct dot blot hybridization on soil rRNA: a probe specific for Firmicutes with low G+C content counted for about 50% of all bacterial rRNA. The bacterial activity in Drentse A grassland soil could be estimated by direct dot blot hybridization and sequencing of clones; it was found that about 65% of all the bacterial ribosomes originated from Firmicutes. The most active bacteria apparently were Bacillus species, from which about half of the sequences derived. Other sequences similar to those of gram-positive bacteria were only remotely related to known Firmicutes with a high G+C content. Other sequences were related to Proteobacteria, mainly the alpha subclass.    Starved Bacillus subtilis cells monitor environmental conditions and intracellular events before committing to sporulation. The precise identity of the sporulation-inducing signals is an open question, but recent results suggest strategies by which Bacillus integrates diverse signals in the decision-making process.    In Bacillus subtilis, osmotolerance is a stationary phase-dependent, adaptive response inhibiting sporulation and sharing common regulators with this process. The extent of this inhibition was determined by measuring transcription activity of promoter lacZ fusions to early sigma genes (spoIIG and spoIIA coding for precursors of sigmaE and sigmaF) and to reporters of them (spoIID, spoIIQ and spoIIIG), in the absence and presence of 0.6 M or 1 M NaCl. The transcription activity of these sigma precursors, normally occurring at the onset of the stationary phase, was reduced to 30-50% of their maximal expression in hyperosmotic conditions; expression of genes under their control was, however, more inhibited (&lt;10%). Therefore, sporulation was blocked at the sigma sigmaE and sigmaF activation steps. This assumption was confirmed by electron microscopic examinations of hyperosmotic cultures, which presented asymmetric septa characteristic of stage II mutants. Discussion was focused on the particular composition and/or structure of membranes during hyperosmotic growth and their involvement in the arrest of sporulation.    A switch in the location of FtsZ ring structures from medial to polar is one of the earliest morphological indicators of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. This switch can be artificially caused during vegetative growth by induction of an active form, Sad67, of the transcription regulator, Spo0A (P. A. Levin and R. Losick, Genes Dev. 10:478-488, 1996). We have used immunofluorescence microscopy to show that the switch in FtsZ ring location during vegetative growth caused by Sad67 induction is blocked by a spoIIE deletion mutation. The spoIIE mutation also impaired polar FtsZ ring formation during sporulation. These results suggest that SpoIIE mediates the Spo0A-directed formation of polar FtsZ rings.    An arginine biosynthetic gene cluster, argC-argJ, of the extreme thermophilic bacterium Thermus thermophilus HB27 was isolated by heterologous complementation of an Escherichia coli acetylornithinase mutant. The recombinant plasmid (pTHM1) conferred ornithine acetyltransferase activity to the E. coli host, implying that T. thermophilus uses the energetically more economic pathway for the deacetylation of acetylornithine. pTHM1 was, however, unable to complement an E. coli argA mutant and no acetylglutamate synthase activity could be detected in E. coli argA cells containing pTHM1. The T. thermophilus argJ-encoded enzyme is thus monofunctional and is unable to use acetyl-CoA to acetylate glutamate (contrary to the Bacillus stearothermophilus homologue). Alignment of several ornithine acetyltransferase amino acid sequences showed no obvious pattern that could account for this difference; however, the monofunctional enzymes proved to have shorter N-termini. Sequence analysis of the pTHM1 3.2 kb insert revealed the presence of the argC gene (encoding N-acetylglutamate-5-semialdehyde dehydrogenase) upstream of the argJ gene. Alignment of several N-acetylglutamate-5-semialdehyde dehydrogenase amino acid sequences allowed identification of two strongly conserved putative motifs for cofactor binding: a putative FAD-binding site and a motif reminiscent of the NADPH-binding fingerprint. The relationship between the amino acid content of both enzymes and thermostability is discussed and an effect of the GC content bias is indicated. Transcription of both the argC and argJ genes appeared to be vector-dependent. The argJ-encoded enzyme activity was twofold repressed by arginine in the native host and was inhibited by ornithine. Both upstream of the argC gene and downstream of the argJ gene an ORF with unknown function was found, indicating that the organization of the arginine biosynthetic genes in T. thermophilus is new.    The Bacillus subtilis glpD gene encodes glycerol-3-phosphate (G3P) dehydrogenase. Expression of glpD is mainly controlled by termination/antitermination of transcription at an inverted repeat in the glpD leader. Antitermination is mediated by the antiterminator protein GlpP in the presence of G3P. In this paper, interaction between GlpP and glpD leader mRNA in vivo and in vitro is reported. In vivo, the antiterminating effect of GlpP can be titrated in a strain carrying the glpD leader on a plasmid. GlpP has been purified and gel shift experiments have shown that it binds to glpD leader mRNA in vitro. GlpP is not similar to other known antiterminator proteins, but database searches have revealed an Escherichia coli ORF which has a high degree of similarity to GlpP.    The dna genes, essential for protein priming DNA replication of bacteriophage phi 29, are transcribed as a long polycistronic mRNA. In the previous study, gene 1 product (gp1) was shown to repress the expression of the upstream dna genes for DNA polymerase and primer protein. To investigate the details of the repression by gp1, we have examined the amount and integrity of polycistronic mRNA encoding DNA polymerase and primer protein by agarose gel electrophoresis and nuclease S1 protection assay. As a result, the amount, size, and integrity of the polycistronic mRNA were not influenced by the presence of gene 1. Furthermore, the RNA binding ability of gp1 was demonstrated by in vitro system using histidine-tagged gp1. These results strongly suggested that translation of the dna genes was affected by gp1 through binding to mRNA. Other possible mechanisms of gene regulation by gp1 were discussed.    Since DNA replication and transcription often temporally and spatially overlap each other, the impact of one process on the other is of considerable interest. We have reported previously that transcription is impeded at the replication termini of Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis in a polar mode and that, when transcription is allowed to invade a replication terminus from the permissive direction, arrest of replication fork at the terminus is abrogated. In the present report, we have addressed four significant questions pertaining to the mechanism of transcription impedance by the replication terminator proteins. Is transcription arrested at the replication terminus or does RNA polymerase dissociate from the DNA causing authentic transcription termination? How does transcription cause abrogation of replication fork arrest at the terminus? Are the points of arrest of the replication fork and transcription the same or are these different? Are eukaryotic RNA polymerases also arrested at prokaryotic replication termini? Our results show that replication terminator proteins of E. coli and B. subtilis arrest but do not terminate transcription. Passage of an RNA transcript through the replication terminus causes the dissociation of the terminator protein from the terminus DNA, thus causing abrogation of replication fork arrest. DNA and RNA chain elongation are arrested at different locations on the terminator sites. Finally, although bacterial replication terminator proteins blocked yeast RNA polymerases in a polar fashion, a yeast transcription terminator protein (Reb1p) was unable to block T7 RNA polymerase and E. coli DnaB helicase.    Prior sequence analysis studies have suggested that bacterial ribonuclease (RNase) Ds comprise a complete domain that is found also in Homo sapiens polymyositis-scleroderma overlap syndrome 100 kDa autoantigen and Werner syndrome protein. This RNase D 3&apos;--&gt;5&apos; exoribonuclease domain was predicted to have a structure and mechanism of action similar to the 3&apos;--&gt;5&apos; exodeoxyibonuclease (proofreading) domain of DNA polymerases. Here, hidden Markov model (HMM) and phylogenetic studies have been used to identify and characterise other sequences that may possess this exonuclease domain. Results indicate that it is also present in the RNase T family; Borrelia burgdorferi P93 protein, an immunodominant antigen in Lyme disease; bacteriophage T4 dexA and Escherichia coli exonuclease I, processive 3&apos;--&gt;5&apos; exodeoxyribonucleases that degrade single-stranded DNA; Bacillus subtilis dinG, a probable helicase involved in DNA repair and possibly replication, and peptide synthase 1; Saccharomyces cerevisiae Pab1p-dependent poly(A) nuclease PAN2 subunit, required for shortening mRNA poly(A) tails; Caenorhabditis elegans and Mus musculus CAF1, transcription factor CCR4-associated factor 1; Xenopus laevis XPMC2, prevention of mitotic catastrophe in fission yeast; Drosophila melanogaster egalitarian, oocyte specification and axis determination, and exuperantia, establishment of oocyte polarity; H.sapiens HEM45, expressed in tumour cell lines and uterus and regulated by oestrogen; and 31 open reading frames including one in Methanococcus jannaschii . Examination of a multiple sequence alignment and two three-dimensional structures of proofreading domains has allowed definition of the core sequence, structural and functional elements of this exonuclease domain.    Regulatory protein p4 of Bacillus subtilis phage phi 29 activates transcription from the viral late A3 promoter by interacting with the C-terminal domain (CTD) of the B. subtilis RNA polymerase alpha subunit, thereby stabilizing the holoenzyme at the promoter. Protein p4 does not interact with the Escherichia coli RNA polymerase and cannot activate transcription with this enzyme. We have constructed a chimerical alpha subunit containing the N-terminal domain of the E. coli alpha subunit and the CTD of the B. subtilis alpha subunit. Reconstitution of RNA polymerases containing this chimerical alpha subunit, the E. coli beta and beta&apos; subunits, and the vegetative sigma factor from either E. coli (sigma 70) or B. subtilis (sigma A), generated hybrid enzymes that were responsive to protein p4 and efficiently supported activation at the A3 promoter. Protein p4 activated transcription with the chimerical enzymes through the same activation surface used with B. subtilis RNA polymerase. Therefore, the B. subtilis alpha-CTD allowed activation by p4 even when the rest of the RNA polymerase subunits belonged to E. coli, a distantly related bacterium. These results strongly suggest that protein p4 works essentially by serving as an anchor that stabilizes RNA polymerase at the promoter.    Nuclear genes play important regulatory roles in the biogenesis of the photosynthetic apparatus of eukaryotic cells by encoding factors that control steps ranging from chloroplast gene transcription to post-translational processes. However, the identities of these genes and the mechanisms by which they govern these processes are largely unknown. By using glass bead-mediated transformation to generate insertional mutations in the nuclear genome of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, we have generated four mutants that are defective in the accumulation of the cytochrome b6f complex. One of them, strain abf3, also fails to accumulate holocytochrome c6. We have isolated a gene, Ccs1, from a C. reinhardtii genomic library that complements both the cytochrome b6f and cytochrome c6 deficiencies in abf3. The predicted protein product displays significant identity with Ycf44 from the brown alga Odontella sinensis, the red alga Porphyra purpurea, and the cyanobacterium Synechocystis strain PCC 6803 (25-33% identity). In addition, we note limited sequence similarity with ResB of Bacillus subtilis and an open reading frame in a homologous operon in Mycobacterium leprae (11-12% identity). On the basis of the pleiotropic c-type cytochrome deficiency in the ccs1 mutant, the predicted plastid localization of the protein, and its relationship to candidate cytochrome biosynthesis proteins in Gram-positive bacteria, we conclude that Ccs1 encodes a protein that is required for chloroplast c-type holocytochrome formation.    Complete interferon-gamma receptor 1 (IFNgammaR1) deficiency has been identified previously as a cause of fatal bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) infection with lepromatoid granulomas, and of disseminated nontuberculous mycobacterial (NTM) infection in children who had not been inoculated with BCG. We report here a kindred with partial IFNgammaR1 deficiency: one child afflicted by disseminated BCG infection with tuberculoid granulomas, and a sibling, who had not been inoculated previously with BCG, with clinical tuberculosis. Both responded to antimicrobials and are currently well without prophylactic therapy. Impaired response to IFN-gamma was documented in B cells by signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 nuclear translocation, in fibroblasts by cell surface HLA class II induction, and in monocytes by cell surface CD64 induction and TNF-alpha secretion. Whereas cells from healthy children responded to even low IFN-gamma concentrations (10 IU/ml), and cells from a child with complete IFNgammaR1 deficiency did not respond to even high IFN-gamma concentrations (10,000 IU/ml), cells from the two siblings did not respond to low or intermediate concentrations, yet responded to high IFN-gamma concentrations. A homozygous missense IFNgR1 mutation was identified, and its pathogenic role was ascertained by molecular complementation. Thus, whereas complete IFNgammaR1 deficiency in previously identified kindreds caused fatal lepromatoid BCG infection and disseminated NTM infection, partial IFNgammaR1 deficiency in this kindred caused curable tuberculoid BCG infection and clinical tuberculosis.    In the bacterium Bacillus subtilis, the DNA-binding regulatory protein, BmrR, activates transcription from the multidrug transporter gene, bmr, after binding either rhodamine or tetraphenylphosphonium. These two compounds, which have no structural similarity, are also substrates for the bacterial multidrug transporter. BmrR belongs to the MerR family of transcription activators but differs from the other family members in its ability to bind unrelated small molecule activators. As an initial step in the elucidation of the mechanism by which BmrR recognizes rhodamine and tetraphenylphosphonium and activates transcription, we have crystallized the 144-amino acid-residue carboxy terminal dimerization/ligand-binding domain of the BmrR, named the BRC (BmrR C-terminus). Tetragonal crystals of ligand-free BRC take the space group P4(1)2(1)2, or its enantiomorph P4(3)2(1)2, with unit cell dimensions a = b = 76.3 A, c = 96.0 A, alpha = beta = gamma = 90 degrees. Diffraction is observed to at least 2.7 A resolution at room temperature. In addition, we determined the secondary structure content of ligand-free and rhodamine-bound BRC by circular dichroism. In the ligand-free form, BRC has considerable beta-sheet content (41%) and little alpha-helix structure (13%). After BRC binds rhodamine, its beta-sheet content increases to 47% while the alpha-helix structure decreases to 11%. The structure of BRC will provide insight not only into its multidrug recognition mechanism but could as well aid in the elucidation of the recognition and efflux mechanisms of Bmr and other bacterial multidrug transporters.    In plants, as in other eukaryotes, most synonymous codons of the genetic-code are not used with equal frequency, but instead some codons are preferred, whereas others are rare. Circumstantial evidence led to the suggestion that rare codons have a negative influence on mRNA stability. To address this question experimentally, rare codons encoded by a Bacillus thuringiensis (B.t.) toxin gene (cryIA(c)) or a synthetic sequence were introduced into a phytohemagglutinin (PHA) reporter gene. In neither case was the mRNA stability appreciably diminished in stably transformed tobacco cell cultures nor was the accumulation of mRNA in transgenic plants affected. Thus rare codons do not appear to be sufficient to cause rapid degradation of the PHA mRNA and potentially other mRNAs in plants.    The tagAB and tagDEF operons, which are adjacent and divergently transcribed, encode genes responsible for cell wall teichoic acid synthesis in Bacillus subtilis. The Bacillus data presented here suggest that PhoP and PhoR are required for direct repression of transcription of the two operons under phosphate starvation conditions but have no regulatory role under phosphate-replete conditions. These data identify for the first time that PhoP-P has a negative role in Pho regulon gene regulation.    SacY antiterminates transcription of the sacB gene in Bacillus subtilis in response to the presence of sucrose in the growth medium. We have found that it can substitute for BglG, a homologous protein, in antiterminating transcription of the bgl operon in Escherichia coli. We therefore sought to determine whether, similarly to BglG, SacY is regulated by reversible phosphorylation in response to the availability of the inducing sugar. We show here that two forms of SacY, phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated, exist in B. subtilis cells and that the ratio between them depends on the external level of sucrose. Addition of sucrose to the growth medium after SacY phosphorylation in the cell resulted in its rapid dephosphorylation. The extent of SacY phosphorylation was found to be proportional to the cellular levels of SacX, a putative sucrose permease which was previously shown to have a negative effect on SacY activity. Thus, the mechanism by which the sac sensory system modulates sacB expression in response to sucrose involves reversible phosphorylation of the regulator SacY, and this process appears to depend on the SacX sucrose sensor. The sac system is therefore a member of the novel family of sensory systems represented by bgl.    Recent work has shown that in Bacillus subtilis catabolite repression of several operons is mediated by a mechanism dependent on DNA-binding protein CcpA complexed to a seryl-phosphorylated derivative of HPr [HPr(Ser-P)], the small phosphocarrier protein of the phosphoenolpyruvate-sugar phosphotransferase system. In this study, it was found that a transposon insertional mutation resulted in the partial loss of gluconate (gnt) and xylose (xyl) operon catabolite repression by glucose, mannitol, and sucrose. The transposon insertion was localized to a gene, designated ccpB, encoding a protein 30% identical to CcpA, and relief from catabolite repression was shown to be due to the absence of CcpB rather than to the absence of a protein encoded by a downstream gene within the same operon. The relative intensities of CcpA- and CcpB-mediated catabolite repression depended on growth conditions. On solid media, and when cells were grown in liquid media with little agitation, CcpB and CcpA both proved to function in catabolite repression. However, when cells were grown in liquid media with much agitation, CcpA alone mediated catabolite repression. Like CcpA, CcpB appears to exert its catabolite-repressing effect by a mechanism dependent on the presence of HPr(Ser-P).    A PCR-amplified DNA fragment of the relA gene from genomic Bacillus subtilis DNA was used to isolate the entire relA/spoT homologue and two adjacent open reading frames (ORFs) from a lambda ZAP Express library. The relA gene, which encodes a protein of 734 amino acid residues (aa), is flanked by an ORF (170aa) that shares high similarity to adenine phosphoribosyltransferase genes (apt), and downstream by an ORF (131 aa) of unknown function. This genetic organization is similar to that in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) and Streptococcus equismilis H46A. relA shows significant similarity to the Escherichia coli relA and spoT genes, which are responsible for the synthesis and degradation of the highly phosphorylated guanosine nucleotides (p)ppGpp, triggering the stringent response. Deletion of the relA gene generated a (p)ppGpp0 phenotype that demonstrated its essential role in the response to amino acid deprivation and resulted in impaired/lowered induction of proteins involved in stress response as well as amino acid biosynthesis, as judged by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. The same effects of impaired induction of some sigmaB-independent proteins could also be shown in a sigB/relA double mutant, supporting the role of relA in derepression/induction of catabolic and anabolic genes during stringent response.    We have previously reported the initial characterization of a catabolic operator site (O[rocA]) for the Bacillus subtilis arginine repressor/activator protein AhrC. Here, we present the characterization by gel retardation and DNase I footprinting of both O(rocA) and a second catabolic operator site, O(rocD). Both operator sites encompass a single recognition site, an ARG box, located immediately upstream of the transcriptional start points, a unique positioning for a transcriptional activator protein. Although there is considerable sequence homology between the two catabolic operator sites, they vary significantly, around twofold, in their apparent affinities for the protein (K&apos;d approximately 90 nM for O[rocA] and approximtaely 190nM for O[rocD]). This difference may result from the lower match to the ARG box consensus of the O(rocD) site. Both catabolic operators show evidence for co-operative binding with respect to protein concentration. Determination of the sequences of two AhrC catabolic operator sites, in combination with the three such biosynthetic sites, has allowed the derivation of an improved B. subtilis ARG box consensus sequence, CATGAATAAAAATg/tCAAg/t. This is not identical to the Escherichia coli consensus operator for the AhrC homologue, ArgR, which may explain the only partial cross-functioning of these proteins in vivo. The O(rocA) site is adjacent to a sharp, stable bend located 5&apos; to the catabolic operator. Circular permutation analysis has been used to determine the relative angle of bend (approximately 50 degrees), its location and the effect of adding magnesium ions and/or AhrC protein. Protein binding increases the relative bend angle to approximately 85 degrees. Bending is shown to be associated with a number of A-tracts in the upstream sequence. However, altering the phasing of the A-tracts has little effect on the affinity for AhrC. Truncation and competition experiments have been used to investigate the possible role of sequences flanking the operator on affinity. Very surprisingly, the affinity of the O(rocA) site appears to increase in the presence of excess, specific competitor fragment, i.e. the system shows anti-competitive effects. Competition is restored at high molar excesses of specific fragment over the protein. We propose a novel model for the assembly of a higher affinity form of AhrC at operator sites that is consistent with both the apparent co-operativity of binding and the anti-competitive effects. These data suggest that the molecular interactions occurring between the prokaryotic arginine-regulatory proteins and their operators may be more complex than is generally appreciated.    The Bacillus subtilis tryptophan biosynthetic genes are regulated by TRAP. Radiographic crystallography indicates that the TRAP complex contains 11 identical subunits arranged in a doughnut-like structure termed the beta-wheel. The trpEDCFBA operon is regulated by an attenuation mechanism in which tryptophan-activated TRAP binds to 11 (G/U)AG repeats in the trp leader transcript. TRAP binding blocks formation of an anti-terminator structure, thereby promoting the formation of an overlapping terminator, resulting in transcription termination preceding the structural genes. When TRAP is not activated, it is unable to bind to the transcript, which allows anti-terminator formation and, hence, transcription of the operon. TRAP is also responsible for regulating translation of trpEand trpG. TRAP binding to trp operon readthrough transcripts promotes refolding of the RNA such that the trpE Shine-Dalgarno sequence is sequestered in a hairpin, thus inhibiting TrpE synthesis. In the case of trpG, TRAP binds to nine repeats that overlap the ribosome-binding site, thereby blocking translation.    Two Bacillus subtilis sigA mutants with amino acid substitutions tending to disrupt the structure of the promoter -10 binding helix of B. subtilis sigma A factor were constructed. B. subtilis DB1001 which contained an A197P substitution was very sensitive to temperature elevation. B. subtilis DB1002 had a T199G substitution and was low in growth potential at the elevated temperature. Degradation of sigma A in B. subtilis DB1001 (t(1/2)=63.2 min) and DB1002 (t(1/2)=186.0 min) occurred readily even at 37 degrees C; however, sigma A in B. subtilis DB2 (wild-type) was fairly stable at the same temperature. The activities of both DB1001 and DB1002 sigma A factors on groE promoter (sigma A-type) were lower than those of the wild-type counterpart at both permissive and restrictive temperatures. The failure of a higher sigma A concentration to suppress the Ts phenotype of DB1001 indicated that the temperature sensitivity of B. subtilis DB1001 was due to altered function, rather than insufficient concentration, of sigma A in the cells. Taken together, our results suggest that the helicity of the promoter -10 binding helix is essential to the packing interaction in the hydrophobic core region of sigma A, which helps to maintain the stable and functional sigma A structure.    Transcription factor 1 (TF1), a type II DNA-binding protein encoded by the Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage SPO1, has the capacity for sequence-selective DNA binding and a preference for 5-hydroxymethyl-2&apos;-deoxyuridine (HmU)-containing DNA. In NMR studies of the TF1/HmU-DNA complex, intermolecular NOEs indicate that the flexible beta-ribbon and C-terminal alpha-helix are involved in the DNA-binding site of TF1, placing it in the beta-sheet category of DNA-binding proteins proposed to bind by wrapping two beta-ribbon &quot;arms&quot; around the DNA. Intermolecular and intramolecular NOEs were used to generate an energy-minimized model of the protein-DNA complex in which both DNA bending and protein structure changes are evident.    We have cloned and sequenced a 3103-bp DNA fragment carrying the gene encoding the Mn-SOD from Streptococcus agalactiae NEM318 serotype III. This DNA fragment contained four orfs that have the same polarity of transcription. Orf1 was truncated by molecular cloning and the corresponding 228-aa-long polypeptide did not exhibit any significant homology with other cognate proteins. Orf2 encodes a protein of 345 aa that displays some similarity (29% identity) with the YqeN peptide of Bacillus subtilis, the function of which is unknown. Orf3 encodes the 202-aa-long Mn-SOD which was functionally expressed in Escherichia coli. Orf4 was also truncated by molecular cloning and encodes 99 aa of the N-terminal moiety of a protein that displays significant homology (40% f identity) with the antiterminator LicT of B. subtilis. Transcriptional analysis revealed that the sodA gene of S. agalactiae NEM318 was transcribed monocistronically from a promoter, the activity of which is neither regulated by pH, O2, nor CO2 concentrations of the culture medium. Analysis by high resolution agarose gel electrophoresis of the AluI DNA polymorphism of the sodA locus in wild-type strains of S. agalactiae belonging to serogroups I, II, or III revealed no detectable difference.    The complete nucleotide sequence of the B. subtilis bacteriophage SPP1 is described. The genome is 44,007 bp in size and has a base composition of 43.7% dG + dC. Only 32.2 kb are essential for phage amplification under laboratory conditions. Transcription using only the &apos;heavy strand&apos; is asymmetric. Eighty-one orfs organized in five early and four late operons were identified. Experiments have shown that 25 orfs are essential. Of the remaining orfs, functions could be predicted for the products of five of the orfs on the basis of comparison of the deduced amino acid sequence to known proteins. Intergenic regions include most of the 5 PE and the 4 PL promoters. Transcripts are polycistronic. Transcription from the PE promoters is mediated by host RP, whereas recognition of the PL promoters requires an additional unidentified phage-encoded product. Translation of mRNA transcribed from most of the orfs seems to be initiated independently, each from its own ribosomal binding and initiation site, although a few cases of coupled translation have been reported. The organization of SPP1 genes involved in the replication, DNA packaging and phage assembly proteins resembles the organization of genes of equivalent regions of different E. coli double-stranded DNA phages. Absence of aa sequence similarity between analogous proteins of different phages suggested that the conserved gene organization is representative of a primordial bacteriophage.    Site-specific recombination is a powerful tool for precise excision of DNA fragments. We used this characteristic to construct a genetic system to report the transient activation of a promoter by promoting the stable acquisition of an antibiotic resistance marker by the bacterium. The system is composed of two compatible plasmid derivatives from Gram-positive bacteria. One of the plasmids allows the insertion of promoters upstream from tnpI, which encodes the site-specific recombinase of Tn4430. The second plasmid carries two selectable resistance genes: one is flanked by two site-specific recombination sequences and is lost following recombination; in contrast, the other resistance gene becomes functional after the site-specific recombination event. By inserting conditionally controlled promoters (the xylose-inducible xylA promoter or the plcA promoter whose expression is dependent on the growth medium) upstream of tnpI, we demonstrated that our genetic system responds to signals inducing transcription by conferring a new resistance phenotype to the host bacteria. Thus, this system can be used to identify genes which are transiently or conditionally expressed.    KinB is one of the two major histidine kinases that provide phosphate input in the phosphorelay to produce SpoOA approximately P, the key transcription factor controlling the initiation of sporulation. A search for insertion mutants affected in activation of KinB-dependent sporulation led to the identification of the lgt locus encoding the lipoprotein glyceryltransferase required for the lipid modification of prolipoproteins before their cleavage and translocation across the cytoplasmic membrane. In parallel, a putative lipoprotein signal peptide cleavage site was detected in KapB, known to be strictly required for KinB-mediated sporulation and located downstream of KinB in a single transcription unit. Using PhoA peptide fusions, we have shown that KapB signal-peptide can direct active alkaline phosphatase to the outer surface of the cytoplasmic membrane in an LGT-dependent manner, strongly suggesting that KapB is a lipoprotein tethered to the outer face of the cytoplasmic membrane via a lipid anchor. As KapB proved to be dispensable for expression of the kinBkapB operon, a chimeric kinase was built consisting of KinA sensor domain fused to KinB kinase domain (KinA&apos;-&apos;B) to assess (i) the involvement of KapB in catalysis of the kinase reaction, and (ii) the ability of KinB to phosphorylate SpoOF in vitro. It was shown that KapB is dispensable for both in vivo and in vitro activation of the phosphorelay by the KinA&apos;-&apos;B chimera and that KinA&apos;-&apos;B phosphorylates SpoOF directly in vitro. Models for the role of KapB in regulating KinB activity are discussed.    The sigma (sigma) subunit of prokaryotic RNA polymerase is required for specific recognition of promoter DNA sequences and transcription initiation. Regulation of gene expression can therefore be achieved by modulating the activity of the sigma subunit. In Bacillus subtilis the mother cell-specific sporulation sigma factor, sigmaK, is synthesized as a precursor protein, pro-sigmaK, with a 20-amino acid pro sequence. This pro sequence renders sigmaK inactive for directing transcription of sigmaK-dependent genes in vivo until the pro sequence is proteolytically removed. To understand the role of the pro sequence in controlling sigmaK activity, we have constructed NH2-terminal truncations of pro-sigmaK and characterized their behavior in vitro at the gerE promoter. In this report we show that the pro sequence inactivates sigmaK by interfering with the ability of sigmaK to associate with the core subunits of polymerase and also influences the interactions between holoenzyme and promoter DNA. Additionally, removal of as few as 6 amino acids (pro-sigmaKDelta6) is sufficient to activate pro-sigmaK for DNA binding and transcription initiation. Surprisingly, pro-sigmaKDelta6 binds to DNA with higher affinity and stimulates transcription 30-fold more efficiently than sigmaK, under certain conditions.    Three promoter sites (P1, P2, and P3) responsible for the sporulation-associated synthesis of Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin, a common cause of food poisoning in humans and animals, were identified. Nested and internal deletions of the cpe promoter region were made to narrow down the location of promoter elements. To measure the effects of the deletions on the expression of cpe, translational fusions containing the promoter deletions were made with the gusA gene of Escherichia coli, which codes for beta-glucuronidase; E. coli-C. perfringens shuttle vectors carrying the fusions were introduced into C. perfringens by electroporation. In addition, in vitro transcription assays were performed with the cpe promoter region as the DNA template for extracts made from sporulating cells. DNA sequences upstream of P1 were similar to consensus SigK-dependent promoters, while P2 and P3 were similar to consensus SigE-dependent promoters. SigE and SigK are sporulation-associated sigma factors known to be active in the mother cell compartment of sporulating cells of Bacillus subtilis, the same compartment in which enterotoxin is synthesized in C. perfringens.    The sigB and sigC genes, encoding two alternative sigma factors of the unicellular marine cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002, were cloned and characterized. Strains in which the sigB and sigC genes were insertionally inactivated were viable under standard laboratory conditions, indicating that SigB and SigC are group 2 sigma factors. Starvation for either nitrogen or carbon caused an increase in sigB mRNA levels. Transcripts for the sigC gene initially increased but then decreased during nitrogen and carbon starvation. The SigC protein could not be identified in cyanobacterial extracts using antisera to Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002 SigA or RpoD from Bacillus subtilis. The ratio of the principal vegetative sigma factor, SigA, to SigB decreased during either nitrogen starvation or carbon starvation, and the levels of SigB also increased in the sigC mutant strain. These results imply that SigB and SigC play roles in modifying transcription in response to changes in carbon and nitrogen availability in this cyanobacterium.    Bacillus subtilis grows anaerobically by at least two different pathways, respiration using nitrate as an electron acceptor and fermentation in the absence of electron acceptors. Regulatory mechanisms have evolved allowing cells to shift to these metabolic capabilities in response to changes in oxygen availability. These include transcriptional activation of fnr upon oxygen limitation, a process requiring the ResD-ResE two-component signal transduction system that also regulates aerobic respiration. FNR then activates transcription of other anaerobically induced genes including the narGHJI operon which encodes a respiratory nitrate reductase. Genes involved in fermentative growth are controlled by an unidentified FNR-independent regulatory pathway.    This article reviews recent progress in characterizing cis-acting DNA elements of the phenobarbital-inducible CYP2B genes. Whereas proximal DNA elements such as the C/EBP binding site regulate basal transcription activity, phenobarbital-responsive enhancer activity is governed by the distal element (designated phenobarbital-responsive enhancer module, PBREM) residing about -2.3 kbp upstream from the transcription start site. Proximal elements are not required to enhance the phenobarbital-inducible transcription, since the PBREM can confer the inducibility to several heterologous promoters. Repression of the basal transcription by a negative element upstream of the -0.8 kbp region, however, may be necessary for the proper regulation of the CYP2B genes.    ComA is a DNA-binding activator protein which is required for the transcription of several late-growth phase expressed genes including srfA, an operon needed for the development of genetic competence, efficient sporulation, and surfactin production in Bacillus subtilis (B. subtilis). We show here that the ComA protein can also recognize the promoter regulatory region of the lchA, lichenysin A synthetase operon, found in. Bacillus licheniformis (B. licheniformis) when introduced into B. subtilis cells. Mutational analysis of this region suggests that a palindromic sequence upstream of the lchA promoter may be the target for ComA-dependent transcriptional activation. Considering that the comA operon is present in the B. licheniformis chromosome, we propose the similar mechanism of transcriptional activation of the lichenysin A synthetase operon.    The Bacillus subtilis araR locus (mapped at about 294 degrees on the genetic map) comprises two open reading frames with divergently arranged promoters, the regulatory gene, araR, encoding a repressor, and a partially cloned gene, termed araE by analogy to the Escherichia coli L-arabinose permease gene. Here, we report the cloning and sequencing of the entire araE gene encoding a 50.4-kDa polypeptide. The araE gene is monocistronic (as determined by Northern blot analysis), and its putative product is very similar to a number of prokaryotic proton-linked monosaccharide transporters (the group I family of membrane transport proteins). Insertional inactivation of the araE gene leads to a conditional Ara- phenotype dependent on the concentration of L-arabinose in the medium. Therefore, we assume that araE encodes a permease involved in L-arabinose transport into the cell. The araE promoter region contains -10 and -35 regions (as determined by primer extension analysis) very similar to those recognized by RNA polymerase containing the major vegetative-cell sigma factor sigmaA, and the -35 region of the transcription start point for araE is located 2 bp from the -35 region of the araR gene. Transcriptional studies demonstrated that the expression from the araE promoter is induced by L-arabinose, repressed by glucose, and negatively regulated by AraR. These observations are consistent with a model according to which in the absence of L-arabinose, AraR binds to a site(s) within the araE/araR promoter, preventing transcription from the araE promoter and simultaneously limiting the frequency of initiation from its own promoter; the addition of L-arabinose will allow transcription from the araE promoter and increase the frequency of initiation from the araR promoter.    The glk gene from Bacillus megaterium, which encodes glucose kinase, was isolated and analyzed. Disruption by a transcriptional glk-luxAB fusion indicated that glk is the only glucose kinase gene in that strain but did not affect growth of that mutant on glucose. Determination of luciferase activity under various growth conditions revealed constitutive transcription of glk. Expression of a xylA-lacZ fusion was repressed by glucose in the strain with the glk disruption about twofold less efficiently than in the wild type. The potential contribution of glk expression to glucose repression is discussed.    To gain insight into the mode of action of mesentericin Y105, a bacteriocin bactericidal agent against Listeria monocytogenes, we undertook to identify the listerial factors mediating this susceptibility by using a genetic approach. Transposon mutants resistant to the bacteriocin were obtained. One of them corresponded to a transposon insertion in a gene (rpoN) encoding a putative protein (447 amino acids) with strong homologies to alternative transcriptional sigma54 factors, including that of Bacillus subtilis (38% identity). Complementation experiments with the wild-type rpoN gene demonstrated that the insertion in rpoN was responsible for the resistance phenotype in L. monocytogenes. Moreover, expression of the L. monocytogenes rpoN gene in an rpoN mutant strain of B. subtilis promoted transcription of a sigma54-dependent operon in the presence of the associated regulator. These results demonstrate that the L. monocytogenes rpoN gene encodes a new sigma54 factor.    A purine repressor (PurR) mediates adenine nucleotide-dependent regulation of transcription initiation of the Bacillus subtilis pur operon. This repressor has been purified for the first time, and binding to control site DNA was characterized. PurR binds in vitro to four operons. Apparent Kd values for binding were 7 nM for the pur operon, 8 nM for purA, 13 nM for purR, and 44 nM for the pyr operon. In each case, DNase I footprints exhibited a pattern of protected and hypersensitive sites that extended over more than 60 bp. A GAAC-N24-GTTC sequence in the pur operon was necessary but not sufficient for the PurR-DNA interaction. However, this motif, which is conserved in the four binding sites, was not required for binding of PurR to purA. Thus, the common DNA recognition element for binding of PurR to the four operons is not known. Multiple PurR-pur operon DNA complexes having a binding stoichiometry that was either approximately two or six repressor molecules per DNA fragment were detected. The results of a torsional constraint experiment suggest that control site DNA forms one right-handed turn around PurR.    The citB gene of Bacillus subtilis encodes aconitase, the enzyme of the Krebs citric acid cycle, which is responsible for the interconversion of citrate and isocitrate. A B. subtilis strain with an insertion mutation in the citB gene was devoid of aconitase activity and aconitase protein, required glutamate for growth in minimal medium, and was unable to sporulate efficiently in nutrient broth sporulation medium. Mutant cells failed to form the asymmetric septum characteristic of sporulating cells and were defective in transcription of the earliest-expressed spo genes, that is, the genes dependent on the Spo0A phosphorelay. However, this early block in sporulation was partially overcome when cells of the citB mutant were induced to sporulate by resuspension in a poor medium. Accumulation of citrate in the mutant cells or in their culture fluid may be responsible for the early block, possibly because citrate can chelate divalent cations needed for the activity of the phosphorelay.    SigmaB-dependent general stress proteins (Gsps) of Bacillus subtilis are essential for the development of glucose-starvation-induced cross-resistance to oxidative challenge. However, the proteins directly involved in this nonspecific resistance to oxidative stress have to be identified. We found that one prominent Gsp displayed strong sequence similarity to the previously characterized oxidative-stress-inducible MrgA protein of B. subtilis and to the starvation-induced Dps/PexB protein of Escherichia coli. We therefore designated this prominent Gsp Dps. While MrgA belongs to the peroxide-stress-inducible proteins needed for the H2O2-inducible adaptive response to oxidative stress, Dps belongs to the proteins induced by heat, salt, or ethanol stress and after starvation for glucose but not by a sublethal oxidative challenge. Primer extension experiments identified two overlapping promoters upstream of the coding region of dps, one being sigmaB dependent (PB) and the other being sigmaB independent (P1). Both promoters contribute to the basal level of dps during growth. After stress or during entry into the stationary phase, transcription from PB strongly increased whereas transcription from P1 decreased. Mutant strains lacking Dps completely failed to develop glucose-starvation-induced resistance to oxidative stress. These results confirm our suggestion that sigmaB-dependent general stress proteins of B. subtilis are absolutely required for the development of nonspecific resistance to oxidative stress.    Analysis of the Bacillus subtilis genome sequence revealed two open reading frames, designated sigX and ypuN (now termed rsiX), that are homologous to fecI and fecR, respectively, of Escherichia coli. fecI encodes a sigma 70-type factor that is necessary for transcription of the ferric citrate transport genes fecABCDE. fecR encodes a cytoplasmic transmembrane protein that is required for the induction of fec transport gene transcription by ferric citrate binding to the FecA outer membrane receptor protein. Investigation of the SigX and RsiX activities disclosed that they are not involved in ferric citrate utilization--since ferric citrate did not serve as an iron source for B. subtilis SG64--or in the regulation of any other ferric siderophore transport system tested. Strains deleted for sigX or rsiX displayed no phenotype under aerobic or anoxic conditions. However, cloned sigX complemented an E. coli fecI mutant, and the Fur box upstream of sigX responded to the E. coli iron regulatory protein Fur. The purified SigX protein was required for in vitro transcription of a sigX-containing DNA fragment by the E. coli RNA polymerase core enzyme. Autoregulation of sigX was also found in vivo using a sigX&apos;-lacZ gene fusion. RsiX inhibited SigX activity in vivo and in vitro and stabilized the SigX protein. RsiX was localized in the membrane fraction. When RsiX is present, SigX is found in the membrane fraction; in the absence of RsiX, some SigX is detectable in the cytoplasm. We conclude that SigX is a sigma factor that belongs to the ECF (extracytoplasmic function) sigma 70-factor family. It is not known which promoters are recognized by SigX in B. subtilis. SigX may be involved in the regulation of iron metabolism, as evidenced by its activity in E. coli.    A recently cloned Bacillus subtilis open reading frame (hemN) upstream of the dnaK operon was identified as encoding a protein involved in oxygen-independent coproporphyrinogen III decarboxylation. B. subtilis hemN functionally complemented two Salmonella typhimurium hemF hemN double mutants under aerobic and anaerobic conditions. A B. subtilis hemN mutant accumulated coproporphyrinogen III only under anaerobic conditions. Interestingly, growth experiments using the B. subtilis hemN mutant revealed normal aerobic and anaerobic growth, indicating the presence of an alternative oxygen-independent enzymatic system. Northern blot experiments identified hemN mRNA as part of an approximately 7-kb pentacistronic transcript consisting of lepA, hemN, hrcA, grpE, and dnaK. One potential start site for aerobic and anaerobic transcription was located 37 bp upstream of the translational start codon of lepA. Comparable amounts of hemN transcript were observed under aerobic and anaerobic growth conditions. No experimental evidence for the presence of hemF in B. subtilis was obtained. Moreover, B. subtilis hemY did not substitute for hemF hemN deficiency in S. typhimurium. These results indicate the absence of hemF and suggest the presence of a second hemN-like gene in B. subtilis.    We have cloned and sequenced a region encoding a lipase operon and a putative, previously uncharacterized metalloprotease of Vibrio cholerae O1. These lie downstream of hlyA and hlyB, which encode the El Tor hemolysin and methyl-accepting chemotactic factor, respectively. Previous reports identified the hlyC gene downstream of hlyAB, encoding an 18.3-kDa protein. However, we now show that this open reading frame (ORF) encodes a 33-kDa protein, and since the amino acid sequence is highly homologous to the triacylglyceride-specific lipase of Pseudomonas spp., hlyC has been renamed lipA. LipA contains the highly conserved pentapeptide and catalytic triad amino acid regions of the catalytic sites of other lipases. The region downstream of lipA has been sequenced and has revealed ORFs lipB and prtV. The amino acid sequence of lipB is homologous to those of the accessory lipase proteins (lipase-specific foldase) required by Pseudomonas and various other bacterial species for the production of mature active lipase, and in agreement with this, we show that both lipA and lipB are required to restore a lipase-deficient lipA null mutant of V. cholerae. The intergenic stop codon for lipA overlaps the ribosome-binding site for lipB, and a stem-loop resembling a rho-independent terminator is present immediately downstream from lipB, suggesting that lipA and lipB form a lipase operon in V. cholerae. prtV lies downstream of lipAB but is transcribed in the opposite direction and is predicted to share the same putative transcriptional terminator with lipAB. The zinc-binding and catalytic domains conserved among many metalloproteases are present in PrtV, which is highly homologous to the immune inhibitor A (InA) metalloprotease of Bacillus thuringiensis. PrtV was visualized as approximately 102 kDa, which is consistent with the coding capacity of the gene. The genetic organization of this region suggests that it is possibly part of a pathogenicity island, encoding products capable of damaging host cells and/or involved in nutrient acquisition by V. cholerae. However, neither lipA nor prtV null mutants were attenuated in the infant mouse model, nor did they exhibit reduced colonization potential compared with wild type in competition experiments.    We have sequenced a previously uncharacterized region of the Bacillus subtilis S10 ribosomal protein gene cluster. The new segment includes genes for S10, L3, L4, L23, L2, S19, L22, S3, and part of L16. These B. subtilis genes map in the same order as the genes in the Escherichia coli S10 ribosomal protein operon. Two potential promoter sequences were identified, one approximately 200 bases and the other approximately 140 bases upstream of the S10 gene. The activities of the two promoters were demonstrated by primer extension analysis, in vitro transcription experiments, and in vivo promoter fusion plasmid studies. In agreement with previous reports, our Northern analysis of exponentially growing cells failed to identify terminators or other active promoters within the S10-spc-alpha region. Our observations suggest that the two S10 promoters reported here are responsible for transcribing a 15-kb-long transcript for all of the genes in the B. subtilis S10, spc, and alpha clusters.    Replication of plasmid pIP501 is regulated at a step subsequent to transcription initiation by an antisense RNA (RNAIII) and transcriptionally by a repressor protein, CopR. Previously, it had been shown that CopR binds to a 44-bp DNA fragment upstream of and overlapping the repR promoter pII. Subsequently, we found that high-copy-number pIP501 derivatives lacking copR and low-copy-number derivatives containing copR produced the same intracellular amounts of RNAIII. This suggested a second, hitherto-unknown function of CopR. In this report, we show that CopR does not affect the half-life of RNAIII. Instead, we demonstrate in vivo that, in the presence of both pII and pIII, CopR provided in cis or in trans causes an increase in the intracellular concentration of RNAIII and that this effect is due to the function of the protein rather than its mRNA. We suggest that, in the absence of CopR, the increased (derepressed) RNAII transcription interferes, in cis, with initiation of transcription of RNAIII (convergent transcription), resulting in a lower RNAIII/plasmid ratio. When CopR is present, the pII promoter is repressed to &gt;90%, so that convergent transcription is mostly abolished and RNAIII/plasmid ratios are high. The hypothesis that RNAII transcription influences promoter pIII through induced changes in DNA supercoiling is supported by the finding that the gyrase inhibitor novobiocin affects the accumulation of both sense and antisense RNA. The dual role of CopR in repression of RNAII transcription and in prevention of convergent transcription is discussed in the context of replication control of pIP501.    We have cloned and characterized a Schistosoma mansoni cDNA encoding a basic protein homologous to the human Y-box binding protein 1 (YB-1). The 1.3-kb S. mansoni YB-1 transcript, which was shown to be expressed in various stages of the parasite life cycle, codes for a protein of 217 amino acids containing, towards its N-terminus, a nucleic acid binding motif, known as the cold-shock domain (CSD). This domain is 64% identical to the cold-shock domain of other members of the Y-box binding protein family and 43% identical to the cold-shock protein CspA of Escherichia coli. In S. mansoni YB-1, the cold-shock domain possess some structural characteristics that permit dimer formation as occurs in the Bacillus subtilis cold-shock protein CspB. The C-terminal region of S. mansoni YB-1 differs from the other Y-box binding proteins because of the presence of tandem repeats of Arg and Gly, suggesting the formation of a fibroin-like beta-sandwich structure. This novel folding pattern for the C-terminus of S. mansoni YB-1 might suggest a distinct specific function for this protein in the parasite.    While identifying genes differentially expressed in cells exposed to ultraviolet radiation, we identified a transcript with a 25-nucleotide region that is highly conserved among a variety of species, including Bacillus circulans, pumpkin, yeast, Drosophila, mouse, and man. In the 5&apos; untranslated region of a gene, the sequence is predominantly in a +/+ orientation with respect to the coding DNA strand; while in the coding region and the 3&apos; untranslated region, the sequence is most frequently in a -/+ orientation. The element is found in many different genes that have diverse functions. Gel mobility shift assays demonstrated the presence of a protein in HeLa cell extracts that binds to the sense and antisense single-stranded consensus oligomers, as well as to double-stranded oligonucleotide. When double-stranded oligomer was used, the size shift demonstrated an additional protein-oligomer complex larger than the one bound to either sense or antisense single-stranded consensus oligomers alone. This element may bind to protein(s) that maintain DNA in a single-stranded orientation for transcription, or be important in the transcription-coupled DNA repair process.    SpollE is an integral membrane protein that governs the establishment of cell-specific gene transcription during the process of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. Synthesis of SpollE commences shortly after the onset of sporulation, after which the protein localizes at sites of potential cell division near both ends of the sporangium. We now show that, within the limits of resolution of immunofluorescence microscopy, this bipolar pattern of localization observed in early-sporulating cells was superimposable with the bipolar pattern of localization of the cell division protein FtsZ. The localization of SpollE was dependent upon FtsZ because little or no localization was observed along the length of filaments that were generated by depleting sporulating cells for the cell division protein. In contrast, SpollE and FtsZ were found to co-localize at regularly spaced intervals in filaments generated by the use of a temperature-sensitive mutant of the cell division gene divlC. Finally, in cells engineered to synthesize SpollE during growth, SpollE localized at the mid-cell position, coincident with the position of FtsZ, which exhibits a medial pattern of localization in cells undergoing binary fission. These results suggest that the bipolar pattern of localization of SpollE is dictated by the sporulation-induced switch in the position of FtsZ or of other, FtsZ-associated, cell division proteins. Thus, it appears that B. subtilis has co-opted the cell division machinery as a means of localizing a cell fate determinant to the polar septum during sporulation.    In previous publications [English, Hughes and Wolf (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 26836-26841; English, Hughes and Wolf (1996) Biochem. J. 316, 279-283], we have demonstrated that peroxisome proliferators and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are inducers of the cytochrome P-450BM-3 gene in Bacillus megaterium ATCC14581. Their mechanism of action involves binding to and subsequent displacement of the transcriptional repressor, Bm3R1, from its operator site, which results in the activation of cytochrome P-450BM-3 gene transcription. We now present evidence that the branched-chain fatty acid, phytanic acid, is a potent inducer of cytochrome P-450BM-3. We have also observed that phytanic acid and peroxisome proliferators are inducers of Bm3R1 protein accumulation and associated DNA-binding activity. In contrast, several barbiturates, although capable of inducing cytochrome P-450BM-3 and Bm3R1 gene transcription, were unable to induce the Bm3R1 protein. We also demonstrate that cytochrome P-450BM-3 readily oxidizes phytanic acid, and provide evidence that, although the omega-1 hydroxy acid derivatives of phytanic acid can associate with Bm3R1, they do so with an affinity two orders of magnitude lower than the unmodified fatty acid. As a consequence, the ability of the hydroxylated product to induce cytochrome P-450BM-3 gene expression in vivo is markedly reduced. These data collectively suggest that metabolism of fatty acids by cytochrome P-450BM-3 leads to an attenuation of their ability to activate the transcription of the BM-3 operon. This work places the action of bacterial fatty acid hydroxylases in an autoregulatory loop where they may be responsible for the inactivation or clearance of the inducing fatty acid signal.    The genome of Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage B103 consists of double-stranded linear DNA 18,630 bp long. The DNA was sequenced, and the sequence was compared with DNA sequences of closely related phages, namely the members of the phage phi29 family. Among them, phage Nf was shown to be the most closely related to B103. Comparisons of several open reading frames (ORFs) among the family members helped to identify genes 1 and 5. A cluster of ORFs between genes 16 and 17 contains two ORFs with partial homology with two phi29 ORFs located in the same region. There are three more ORFs in this region of B103 with good ribosome binding sites (RBS) and optimal codon usage that are not homologous to any of the phi29 ORFs. The function of these five ORFs remains unexplained. It was shown that major promoters characterized in phi29 are retained in B103. Where many substitutions occur in the vicinity of a promoter, at least the -10 and -35 boxes are conserved.    A 3135 bp DNA segment downstream of the spl gene on the Bacillus subtilis chromosome was cloned and its nucleotide sequence determined. An open reading frame capable of encoding a putative protein of 654 amino acids with a calculated molecular mass of 72.1 kDa was identified. The deduced amino acid sequence was similar to the McpA and McpB proteins of B. subtilis. McpA and McpB encode different methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins (MCPs). A mutant strain containing an antibiotic resistance DNA cassette inserted into the region containing the MCP-like reading frame suffered a complete loss of taxis to the amino acids cysteine, proline, threonine, glycine, serine, lysine, valine and arginine. The open reading frame was designated mcpC. The wild-type and an mcpC mutant strain were analysed for their content of methylated proteins and it was found that mcpC encodes a methylated membrane protein that has previously been designated H3. These results show that mcpC encodes a third MCP in B. subtilis. The transcription start site upstream of the mcpC gene was determined by primer extension analysis and it was found to be preceded by a potential promoter sequence that is recognized by the sigma D form of RNA polymerase. The level of beta-galactosidase expressed from a transcriptional mcpC-lacZ fusion was increased threefold when cells entered the stationary phase. No beta-galactosidase could be detected in a sigD genetic background.    Recent years have seen an increase in the development of gene expression systems for industrial Gram-positive bacteria with low guanine and cytosine content that belong to the genera Bacillus, Clostridium, Lactococcus, Lactobacillus, Staphylococcus and Streptococcus. In particular, considerable advances have been made in the construction of inducible gene expression systems based on the capacity of these bacteria to utilize specific sugars or to secrete autoinducing peptides that are involved in quorum sensing. These controlled expression systems allow for present and future exploitation of these bacteria as cell factories in medical, agricultural, and food biotechnology.    The RNA polymerase sigma subunit, sigmaH, of Bacillus subtilis is required for the transcription of genes that are induced in late-growth cultures at high cell density, including genes that function in sporulation. The expression of sigmaH-controlled genes is repressed when nutrient broth sporulation medium (Difco sporulation medium [DSM]) is supplemented with high concentrations of glucose and glutamine (DSM-GG), preferred carbon and nitrogen sources of B. subtilis. Under these conditions, the pH of the DSM-GG medium decreases to approximately 5. Raising the pH by the addition of morpholinepropanesulfonic acid (MOPS) or Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) results in a dramatic increase in the expression of lacZ fusions to sigmaH-dependent promoters. Correspondingly, the level of sigmaH protein was higher in cells of late-growth DSM-GG cultures treated with a pH stabilizer. When sigmaH-dependent gene expression was examined in cells bearing a mutation in abrB, encoding the transition state regulator that negatively controls genes transcribed by the sigmaH form of RNA polymerase, derepression was observed as well as an increase in medium pH. Reducing the pH with acetic acid resulted in repression, suggesting that AbrB was not functioning directly in pH-dependent repression but was required to maintain the low medium pH in DSM-GG. AbrB protein levels were high in late-growth, DSM-GG cultures but significantly lower when the pH was raised by Tris-HCl addition. An active tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle was required to obtain maximum derepression of sigmaH-dependent transcription, and transcription of the TCA cycle enzyme gene citB was repressed in DSM-GG but derepressed when the pH was artificially raised. The negative effect of low pH on sigmaH-dependent lacZ expression was also observed in unbuffered minimal medium and appeared to be exerted posttranslationally with respect to spo0H expression. However, the addition of amino acids to the medium caused pH-independent repression of both sigmaH-dependent transcription and spo0H-lacZ expression. These results suggest that spo0H transcription or translation is repressed by a mechanism responding to the availability of amino acids whereas spo0H is posttranslationally regulated in response to external pH.    The chromosomal ccpA gene from Lactobacillus casei ATCC 393 has been cloned and sequenced. It encodes the CcpA protein, a central catabolite regulator belonging to the LacI-GalR family of bacterial repressors, and shows 54% identity with CcpA proteins from Bacillus subtilis and Bacillus megaterium. The L. casei ccpA gene was able to complement a B. subtilis ccpA mutant. An L. casei ccpA mutant showed increased doubling times and a relief of the catabolite repression of some enzymatic activities, such as N-acetylglucosaminidase and phospho-beta-galactosidase. Detailed analysis of CcpA activity was performed by using the promoter region of the L. casei chromosomal lacTEGF operon which is subject to catabolite repression and contains a catabolite responsive element (cre) consensus sequence. Deletion of this cre site or the presence of the ccpA mutation abolished the catabolite repression of a lacp::gusA fusion. These data support the role of CcpA as a common regulatory element mediating catabolite repression in low-GC-content gram-positive bacteria.    Nitrate is a significant nitrogen source for plants and microorganisms. Recent molecular genetic analyses of representative bacterial species have revealed structural and regulatory genes responsible for the nitrate-assimilation phenotype. Together with results from physiological and biochemical studies, this information has unveiled fundamental aspects of bacterial nitrate assimilation and provides the foundation for further investigations. Well-studied genera are: the cyanobacteria, including the unicellular Synechococcus and the filamentous Anabaena; the gamma-proteobacteria Klebsiella and Azotobacter; and a Gram-positive bacterium, Bacillus. Nitrate uptake in most of these groups seems to involve a periplasmic binding protein-dependent system that presumably is energized by ATP hydrolysis (ATP-binding cassette transporters). However, Bacillus may, like fungi and plants, utilize electrogenic uptake through a representative of the major facilitator superfamily of transport proteins. Nitrate reductase contains both molybdenum cofactor and an iron-sulfur cluster. Electron donors for the enzymes from cyanobacteria and Azotobacter are ferredoxin and flavodoxin, respectively, whereas the Klebsiella and Bacillus enzymes apparently accept electrons from a specific NAD(P)H-reducing subunit. These subunits share sequence similarity with the reductase components of bacterial aromatic ring-hydroxylating dehydrogenases such as toluene dioxygenase. Nitrite reductase contains sirohaem and an iron-sulfur cluster. The enzymes from cyanobacteria and plants use ferredoxin as the electron donor, whereas the larger enzymes from other bacteria and fungi contain FAD and NAD(P)H binding sites. Nevertheless, the two forms of nitrite reductase share recognizable sequence and structural similarity. Synthesis of nitrate assimilation enzymes and uptake systems is controlled by nitrogen limitation in all bacteria examined, but the relevant regulatory proteins exhibit considerable structural and mechanistic diversity in different bacterial groups. A second level of control, pathway-specific induction by nitrate and nitrite in Klebsiella, involves transcription antitermination. Several issues await further experimentation, including the mechanism and energetics of nitrate uptake, the pathway(s) for nitrite uptake, the nature of electron flow during nitrate reduction, and the action of transcriptional regulatory circuits. Fundamental knowledge of nitrate assimilation physiology should also enhance the study of nitrate metabolism in soil, water and other natural environments, a challenging topic of considerable interest and importance.    Most biological membranes contain one or two type I signal peptidases for the removal of signal peptides from secretory precursor proteins. In this respect, the Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis seems to be exceptional, because it contains at least four chromosomally-encoded type I signal peptidases, denoted SipS, SipT, SipU, and SipV. Here, we report the identification of the sipT and sipV genes, and the functional characterization of SipT, SipU, and SipV. The four signal peptidases have similar substrate specificities, as they can all process the same beta-lactamase precursor. Nevertheless, they seem to prefer different pre-proteins, as indicated by studies on the processing of the pre-alpha-amylase of Bacillus amyloliquefaciens in strains lacking SipS, SipT, SipU, or SipV. The sipU and sipV genes are constitutively transcribed at a low level, suggesting that they are required for processing of (pre-)proteins secreted during all growth phases. In contrast, the transcription of sipS and sipT is temporally controlled, in concert with the expression of the genes for most secretory proteins, which suggests that SipS and SipT serve to increase the secretory capacity of B. subtilis. Taken together, our findings suggest that SipS, SipT, SipU, and SipV serve different functions during the exponential and post-exponential growth phase of B. subtilis.    Despite a growing number of reports indicating non-Mendelian inheritance of transgene expression in monocots, no detailed description of the structure and stability of the transgene exists for transformants generated by direct DNA-transfer techniques, making the cause for these observations difficult to determine. In this paper we describe the complex organization of Btt cryIIIA and bar transgenes in rice (Oryza sativa L.) that displayed aberrant segregation in R1 progeny. Silencing rather than rearrangement of the bar gene was implicated because the herbicide-sensitive R1 plants had a DNA hybridization profile identical to that of the resistant R0 parent and R1 siblings. Genomic DNA analysis revealed substantial methylation of the Ubi1/bar sequences in silenced plants and, to a lesser degree, in herbicide-resistant plants, suggesting that the transgene locus was potentiated for silencing. Nuclease protection and nuclear run-on assays confirmed that silencing was due to transcriptional inactivation. Treatment of R2 progeny of silenced plants with 5-azacytidine resulted in demethylation of the Ubi1 promoter and reactivation of bar gene expression, demonstrating a functional relationship for methylation in gene silencing. These findings indicate that methylation-based silencing may be frequent in cereals transformed by direct DNA protocols that insert multiple, often rearranged sequences.    We utilized a new cell ablation strategy to ablate specific anther cell types involved in the dehiscence process. The tobacco TA56 gene promoter is active within the circular cell cluster, stomium, and connective regions of the anther at different developmental stages. We introduced a cytotoxic TA56/barnase gene into tobacco plants together with three different anticytotoxic barstar genes. The anticytotoxic barstar genes were used to protect subsets of anther cell types from the cytotoxic effects of the TA56/barnase gene. The chimeric barstar genes were fused with (1) the tobacco TP12 gene promoter that is active at high levels in most anther cell types; (2) the soybean lectin gene promoter that is active earlier in the connective, and at lower levels in the circular cell cluster and stomium, than is the TA56 promoter; and (3) the tobacco TA20 gene promoter that is active at high levels in most anther cell types but has a different developmental profile than does the TP12 promoter. Normal anther development and dehiscence occurred in plants containing the TA56/barnase and TP12/barstar genes, indicating that barstar protects diverse anther cell types from the cytotoxic effects of barnase. Anthers containing the TA56/barnase and lectin/barstar genes also developed normally but failed to dehisce because of extensive ablation of the circular cell cluster, stomium, and contiguous connective regions. Anthers containing the TA56/barnase and TA20/barstar genes failed to dehisce as well. However, only the stomium region was ablated in these anthers. The connective, circular cell cluster, and adjacent wall regions were protected from ablation by the formation of barnase/barstar complexes. We conclude that anther dehiscence at flower opening depends on the presence of a functional stomium region and that chimeric barnase and barstar genes containing promoters that are active in several overlapping cell types can be used for targeted cell ablation experiments.    Regulation of gene expression in the mother cell compartment of sporulating Bacillus subtilis involves sequential activation and inactivation of several transcription factors. Among them are two sigma factors, sigmaE and sigmaK, and a DNA-binding protein, SpoIIID. A decrease in the level of SpoIIID is thought to relieve its repressive effect on transcription by sigmaK RNA polymerase of certain spore coat genes. Previous studies showed that sigmaK negatively regulates the level of spoIIID mRNA. Here, it is shown that sigmaK does not affect the stability of spoIIID mRNA. Rather, sigmaK appears to negatively regulate the synthesis of spoIIID mRNA by accelerating the disappearance of sigmaE RNA polymerase, which transcribes spoIIID. As sigmaK begins to accumulate by 4 h into sporulation, the sigmaE level drops rapidly in wild-type cells but remains twofold to fivefold higher in sigK mutant cells during the subsequent 4 h. In a strain engineered to produce sigmaK 1 h earlier than normal, twofold less sigmaE than that in wild-type cells accumulates. SigmaK did not detectably alter the stability of sigmaE in pulse-chase experiments. However, beta-galactosidase expression from a sigE-lacZ transcriptional fusion showed a pattern similar to the level of sigmaE protein in sigK mutant cells and cells prematurely expressing sigmaK. These results suggest that the appearance of sigmaK initiates a negative feedback loop controlling not only transcription of spoIIID, but the entire sigmaE regulon, by directly or indirectly inhibiting the transcription of sigE.    I investigated the transcriptional regulation of sigmaD synthesis. sigD is part of the fla/che operon, but the gene is also preceded by a promoter of its own. fla/che-dependent transcription is severely reduced in sigD-negative strains. Activity of the promoter in front of sigD is strictly temporally regulated. Deletion of this promoter results in a reduced and delayed activation of transcription of the fla/che operon.    A regulatory gene, reg1, was identified in Streptomyces lividans. It encodes a 345-amino-acid protein (Reg1) which contains a helix-turn-helix DNA-binding motif in the N-terminal region. Reg1 exhibits similarity with the LacI/GalR family members over the entire sequence. It displays 95% identity with MalR (the repressor of malE in S. coelicolor), 65% identity with ORF-Sl (a putative regulatory gene of alpha-amylase of S. limosus), and 31% identity with CcpA (the carbon catabolite repressor in Bacillus subtilis). In S. lividans, the chromosomal disruption of reg1 affected the expression of several genes. The production of alpha-amylases of S. lividans and that of the alpha-amylase of S. limosus in S. lividans were enhanced in the reg1 mutant strains and relieved of carbon catabolite repression. As a result, the transcription level of the alpha-amylase of S. limosus was noticeably increased in the reg1 mutant strain. Moreover, the induction of chitinase production in S. lividans was relieved of carbon catabolite repression by glucose in the reg1 mutant strain, while the induction by chitin was lost. Therefore, reg1 can be regarded as a pleiotropic regulatory gene in S. lividans.    A homolog of the multiple-stress-responsive transcription factor sigmaB of Bacillus subtilis was predicted from the DNA sequence analysis of a region of the Staphylococcus aureus chromosome. A hybrid between the coding sequence of the first 11 amino acids of the gene 10 leader peptide of phage T7 (T7.Tag) and the putative sigB gene of S. aureus was constructed and cloned into Escherichia coli BL21(DE3)pLysS for overexpression from a T7 promoter. A homogeneous preparation of the overproduced protein was obtained by affinity chromatography with a T7.Tag monoclonal antibody coupled to agarose. The amino-terminal amino acid sequence of the first 22 residues of the purified protein matched that deduced from the nucleotide sequence. Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of the purified protein, designated sigmaSB, indicated that it migrated as an approximately 39-kDa polypeptide. Promoter-specific transcription from the B. subtilis sigmaB-dependent PB promoter of the sigB operon was stimulated by sigmaSB in a concentration-dependent fashion when reconstituted with the S. aureus core RNA polymerase (RNAP). Specific transcript from the predicted sigmaB-dependent PB promoter of the sigB operon of S. aureus was obtained by the reconstituted RNAP in a runoff transcription reaction. The sar operon of S. aureus contains three promoter elements (P1, P2, and P3) and is known to partly control the synthesis of a number of extracellular toxins and several cell wall proteins. Our in vitro studies revealed that transcription from the P1 promoter is dependent on the primary sigma factor sigmaSA, while that of the P3 promoter is dependent on sigmaSB. As determined by primer extension studies, the 5&apos; end of the sigmaSB-initiated mRNA synthesized in vitro from the sar P3 promoter is in agreement with the 5&apos; end of the cellular RNA.    Several gene products, including three two-component systems, make up a signal transduction network that controls the phosphate starvation response in Bacillus subtilis. Epistasis experiments indicate that PhoP, a response regulator, is furthest downstream of the known regulators in the signaling pathway that regulates Pho regulon genes. We report the overexpression, purification, and use of PhoP in investigating its role in Pho regulon gene activation. PhoP was a substrate for both the kinase and phosphatase activities of its cognate sensor kinase, PhoR. It was not phosphorylated by acetyl phosphate. Purified phosphorylated PhoP (PhoPP) had a half-life of approximately 2.5 h, which was reduced to about 15 min by addition of the same molar amount of *PhoR (the cytoplasmic region of PhoR). ATP significantly increased phosphatase activity of *PhoR on PhoPP. In gel filtration and cross-linking studies, both PhoP and PhoPP were shown to be dimers. The dimerization domain was located within the 135 amino acids at the N terminus of PhoP. Phosphorylated or unphosphorylated PhoP bound to one of the alkaline phosphatase gene promoters, the phoB promoter. Furthermore, PhoP bound exclusively to the -18 to -73 region (relative to the transcriptional start site +1) of the phosphate starvation-inducible promoter (Pv) but not to the adjacent developmentally regulated promoter (Ps). These data corroborate the genetic data for phoB regulation and suggest that activation of phoB is via direct interaction between PhoP and the phoB promoter. Studies of the phosphorylation, oligomerization, and DNA binding activity of the PhoP protein demonstrate that its N-terminal phosphorylation and dimerization domain and its C-terminal DNA binding domain function independently of one another, distinguishing PhoP from other response regulators, such as PhoB (Escherichia coli) and NtrC.    The alpha-acetolactate decarboxylase gene aldB is clustered with the genes for the branched-chain amino acids (BCAA) in Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis. It can be transcribed with BCAA genes under isoleucine regulation or independently of BCAA synthesis under the control of its own promoter. The product of aldB is responsible for leucine sensibility under valine starvation. In the presence of more than 10 microM leucine, the alpha-acetolactate produced by the biosynthetic acetohydroxy acid synthase IlvBN is transformed to acetoin by AldB and, consequently, is not available for valine synthesis. AldB is also involved in acetoin formation in the 2,3-butanediol pathway, initiated by the catabolic acetolactate synthase, AlsS. The differences in the genetic organization, the expression, and the kinetics parameters of these enzymes between L. lactis and Klebsiella terrigena, Bacillus subtilis, or Leuconostoc oenos suggest that this pathway plays a different role in the metabolism in these bacteria. Thus, the alpha-acetolactate decarboxylase from L. lactis plays a dual role in the cell: (i) as key regulator of valine and leucine biosynthesis, by controlling the acetolactate flux by a shift to catabolism; and (ii) as an enzyme catalyzing the second step of the 2,3-butanediol pathway.    Bacillus subtilis degR, a positive regulator of the production of degradative enzymes, is negatively regulated by the competence transcription factor ComK which is overproduced in mecA null mutants. We used transposon Tn10 to search for a mutation that reduced the repression level of degR caused by a mecA mutation. A new gene exerting positive regulation on comK was obtained and designated med (suppressor of mecA effect on degR). Sequence determination, Northern analysis, and primer extension analyses revealed that the med gene contained an open reading frame (ORF) composed of 317 codons and was transcribed into an approximately 1,250-nucleotide mRNA together with its short downstream gene. The expression of comK is positively regulated by factors such as ComK itself, ComS (SrfA)-MecA, DegU, SinR, and AbrB. Quantitative analyses using comK&apos;-&apos;lacZ, srfA-lacZ, degU&apos;-&apos;lacZ, and sinR&apos;-&apos;lacZ fusions showed that disruption of med caused a significant decrease in comK expression in both mecA+ and mecA strains, while expression of srfA, sinR, and degU was not affected by the mutation. An epistatic analysis revealed that overproduction of ComK resulted in alteration of med expression, suggesting a regulatory loop between comK and med. Several possible mechanisms for positive regulation of comK by Med are discussed.    Kinase A is the sensor histidine kinase responsible for processing postexponential phase information and providing phosphate input to the phosphorelay that activates developmental transcription via phosphorylated Spo0A. A protein inhibitor, KipI, of kinase A was discovered encoded in an operon of genes of unknown function but regulated by the availability of fixed nitrogen. KipI is a potent inhibitor of the autophosphorylation reaction of kinase A but does not inhibit phosphate transfer to the Spo0F response regulator once kinase A is phosphorylated. KipI is an inhibitor of the catalytic domain of kinase A affecting the ATP/ADP reactions and not the phosphotransferase functions of this domain. The inhibitory activity of KipI is counteracted by the product of another gene in the operon, KipA. This protein may bind to KipI, preventing its function as an inhibitor of kinase A. KipI may be the first representative of a new class of signal transduction inhibitors that function by direct interaction with the catalytic domain of histidine kinases to counteract signals influencing the &quot;sensor&quot; domain of such kinases. This inhibitor represents yet another way by which the phosphorelay signal transduction system is affected by negative regulators under the control of metabolic, environmental, or cell cycle influences antithetical to the initiation of developmental transcription.    The Streptomyces coelicolor rpoC gene, that encodes the beta&apos; subunit of RNA polymerase, was isolated using the Escherichia coli rpoC gene as a hybridization probe. Comparison of the predicted amino acid sequence of the S. coelicolor beta&apos; subunit to those characterized from other bacteria revealed three distinct subfamilies of beta&apos; subunits, one of which consists of the S. coelicolor subunit and those from Mycobacterium leprae and Mycoplasma genitalium. Using site-directed mutagenesis, the carboxy terminus of the S. coelicolor beta&apos; subunit was modified to contain six histidine residues. The histidine-tagged gene, rpoCHIS, was used to replace the wild-type allele in the chromosome of S. coelicolor and S. lividans. These strains were unaffected in growth and sporulation, demonstrating that the histidine-tagged RNA polymerase was competent to carry out all essential in-vivo functions. During a 1-day procedure, highly purified RNA polymerase was obtained by nickel-NTA agarose affinity chromatography followed by heparin-sepharose chromatography. Using in-vitro run-off transcription assays, the affinity purified RNA polymerase was shown to initiate transcription correctly from the S. lividans galP1 and galP2 promoters, and the Bacillus subtilus veg and ctc promoters. An extension of this procedure yielded highly-purified core RNA polymerase. To facilitate introduction of the rpoCHIS allele into other genetic backgrounds, a mutation in the adjacent gene, rpoB (rifA), conferring rifampin-resistance, was isolated in S. coelicolor to provide a genetic marker to follow transfer of the rpoCHIS allele. The use of this affinity chromatography procedure, in combination with the ability to introduce the rpoCHIS allele into different Streptomyces strains by transformation, will greatly facilitate the in-vitro analysis of transcription in members of this genus.    The consequences on replication of collisions between phi29 DNA polymerase, a monomeric replicase endowed with strand displacement capacity, and the transcription machinery have been studied in vitro. Codirectional collisions with stalled transcription ternary complexes at four different promoters in the phi29 genome were found to block replication fork progression. Upon collision, the DNA polymerase remained on the template and was able to resume elongation once the RNA polymerase was allowed to move. Collisions with RNA polymerase molecules moving in the same direction also interfered with replication, causing a decrease in the replication rate. These results lead to the proposal that in bacteriophage phi29 a transcription complex physically blocks the progression of a replication fork. We suggest that temporal regulation of transcription and the low probability that the replication and transcription processes colocalize in vivo contribute to achieving minimal interference between the two events.    The nucleotide sequence of the surP and surT genes in a sucrose-utilisation cluster cloned from Bacillus stearothermophilus NUB36 was determined. The surP gene encoded a protein of 466 amino acid residues and shared 60-62% amino acid identity with the sucrose-specific enzyme II components of the phosphotransferase system of Bacillus subtilis, Salmonella typhimurium and Klebsiella pneumoniae. SurP, like other sucrose EIIs, lacked the hydrophilic domain containing the first (IIA) phosphorylation site. The surT gene encoded a 278 amino acid polypeptide which showed 63.1% and 54% amino acid identity to the B. subtilis antiterminators SacT and SacY, respectively. A region containing a palindromic structure preceding surP was highly homologous to the regulatory transcription termination regions of the sacPA and sacB operons of B. subtilis and the bgl operon of Escherichia coli. Hence the sucrose gene cluster of B. stearothermophilus NUB36 is very similar to the B. subtilis sacPA operon in terms of gene order and regulatory organisation.    SacY is the prototype of a family of regulatory proteins able to prevent transcription termination. It interacts with a 29 nucleotide RNA sequence able to fold into a stem-loop structure and partially overlapping with a terminator sequence located in the 5&apos; leader mRNA region of the gene it controls. We show here that the N-terminal fragment of SacY, SacY(1-55), and the corresponding fragments of other members of the family have antiterminator activities with efficiency and specificity identical to those of the full-length proteins. In vitro, this activity correlates with the specific affinity of SacY(1-55) for its RNA target. UV melting experiments demonstrate that SacY(1-55) binding stabilizes the RNA target structure. The NMR solution structure of SacY(1-55) is very similar to that obtained in the crystal (van Tilbeurgh et al., 1997): the peptide is folded as a symmetrical dimer without any structural homology with other RNA-binding domains yet characterized. According to a preliminary NMR analysis of the SacY(1-55)-RNA complex, the protein dimer is not disrupted upon RNA binding and several residues implicated in RNA recognition are located at the edge of the dimer interface. This suggests a new mode of protein-RNA interaction.    Class I heat-inducible genes in Bacillus subtilis consist of the heptacistronic dnaK and the bicistronic groE operon and form the CIRCE regulon. Both operons are negatively regulated at the level of transcription by the HrcA repressor interacting with its operator, the CIRCE element. Here, we demonstrate that the DnaK chaperone machine is not involved in the regulation of HrcA and that the GroE chaperonin exerts a negative effect in the post-transcriptional control of HrcA. When expression of the groE operon was turned off, the dnaK operon was significantly activated and large amounts of apparently inactive HrcA repressor were produced. Overproduction of GroEL, on the other hand, resulted in decreased expression of the dnaK operon. Introduction of the hrcA gene and its operator into Escherichia coli was sufficient to elicit a transient heat shock response, indicating that no additional Bacillus-specific gene(s) was needed. As in B. subtilis, the groEL gene of E. coli negatively influenced the activity of HrcA. HrcA could be overproduced in E. coli, but formed inclusion bodies which could be dissolved in 8 M urea. Upon removal of urea, HrcA had a strong tendency to aggregate, but aggregation could be suppressed significantly by the addition of GroEL. Purified HrcA repressor was able specifically to retard a DNA fragment containing the CIRCE element, and the amount of retarded DNA was increased significantly in the presence of GroEL. These results suggest that the GroE chaperonin machine modulates the activity of the HrcA repressor and therefore point to a novel function of GroE as a modulator of the heat shock response.    Myxococcus xanthus is a Gram-negative bacterium that undergoes multicellular development upon starvation. We have developed a simple and rapid procedure for partial purification of RNA polymerase from growing M. xanthus cells, using heparin-agarose and DNA-cellulose chromatographies. In addition to core subunits, the enzyme contains one fairly abundant polypeptide of approximately 105 kDa. We have shown by Western blot analysis and protein sequencing that the 105-kDa polypeptide is sigmaA, the product of the M. xanthus sigA gene. Partially purified sigmaA RNA polymerase, or holoenzyme reconstituted from sigmaA and core RNA polymerase, transcribed in vitro the vegA and aphII genes that are known to be expressed in growing M. xanthus cells. Reconstituted sigmaA RNA polymerase produced vegA mRNA in vitro with the same 5&apos; end as vegA mRNA produced in vivo, demonstrating that initiation of transcription was accurate in vitro. These results provide biochemical evidence that sigmaA is the major vegetative sigma factor of M. xanthus. To our knowledge, this is the first report of in vitro transcription of M. xanthus chromosomal genes, providing a foundation for further biochemical analysis of transcriptional regulatory mechanisms in a microbe that relies extensively on cell-cell interactions.    An insertional mutation in ftsK, encoding an Escherichia coli product similar to the sporulation protein SpoIIIE of Bacillus subtilis, results in uspA overexpression in stationary phase and impairs cell division. The ftsK1::cat insertion mutant forms chains which are the result of inhibited cell-cell separation, while chromosome synthesis and partitioning appear to be normal as judged by flow cytometry and electron and light microscopy in combination with DNA staining. The cells of the chains are attached to each other by a small envelope structure, and unlike in a spoIIIE mutant of B. subtilis, there is no DNA trapped in the division plane. In addition, plasmids harboring a truncated ftsK allele lacking the last 195 bp of the gene cause chain formation in wild-type cells. While the mutant cells grow at essentially the same rate as the parent in complex and defined minimal media, they are sensitive to stresses. Specifically, the mutant failed to grow at elevated salt concentrations and survived stationary phase poorly. The phenotypes of the ftsK1::cat mutant are complemented by the 3&apos; end (spoIIIE-like half) of the ftsK locus. In contrast, the 5&apos; end of the ftsK locus reported to complement ftsK44(Ts) phenotypes does not complement the phenotypes of the ftsK1::cat mutant.    A novel Bacillus gene was isolated and characterized. It encodes a homolog of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Pet112p, a protein that has no characterized relative and is dispensable for cell viability but required for mitochondrial translation. Expression of the Bacillus protein in yeast, modified to ensure mitochondrial targeting, partially complemented the phenotype of the pet112-1 mutation, demonstrating a high degree of evolutionary conservation for this as yet unidentified component of translation.    Bacillus subtilis Spo0A activates transcription from both sigmaA- and sigmaH-dependent promoters. Baldus et al. (2) identified two amino acid substitutions in the carboxyl terminus of sigmaA, K356E and H359R, that specifically impaired Spo0A-activated transcription in vivo. To test the model in which the K356E and H359R substitutions in sigmaA interfere with the interaction of Spo0A and sigmaA, we examined the effects of alanine substitutions at these positions in sigmaA on sigmaA&apos;s ability to direct transcription in vivo and in vitro. We found that alanine substitutions at these positions specifically reduced expression from the sigmaA-dependent, Spo0A-dependent promoters, spoIIG and spoIIE, in vivo. Furthermore, we found that stimulation of spoIIG promoter activity by Spo0A in vitro was reduced by the single substitutions H359A and H359R in sigmaA.    The spoVM gene encodes a 26-amino-acid polypeptide that is essential for spore formation in Bacillus subtilis. A transposon insertion within the spoVM open reading frame has been shown to encode a chimeric protein which is biologically inactive and produces a phenotype identical to that of a deletion and insertion mutation. A genetic approach was used to identify possible interacting proteins, and the membrane-bound FtsH protease was identified. Mutations in ftsH suppressed the sporulation defect of certain spoVM mutants but not others. However, production of the mother cell sigma factors, sigmaE and sigmaK, was abnormal in the suppressed strains, and mutations in either spoVM or ftsH alone impaired sigma factor production and sporulation gene expression. Using FtsH purified from Escherichia coli, we demonstrated that in vitro (i) SpoVM inhibits FtsH protease activity and (ii) SpoVM is a substrate for the FtsH protease. We propose that during sporulation, SpoVM serves as a competitive inhibitor of FtsH activity. This interaction appears to be important for completion of the prespore engulfment step of sporulation, based on the phenotype of certain spoVM ftsH double mutants.    Expression of urease, which is encoded by the ureABC operon, is regulated in response to nitrogen availability in Bacillus subtilis. Three ureABC promoters were identified in primer extension experiments and by examination of beta-galactosidase expression from ure-lacZ fusions. P1, a low-level constitutive promoter, lies immediately upstream of ureA. The P2 promoter is transcribed by the E sigmaH form of RNA polymerase and initiates transcription 270 bp upstream of the ureA start codon. The transcriptional start site for the sigmaA-dependent P3 promoter is located 839 bp upstream of the ureA start codon. To identify transcription factors that control ureABC expression, regulation of the P2 and P3 promoters was examined in wild-type and mutant strains. During rapid growth in minimal medium containing glucose and amino acids, CodY represses expression of the P2 and P3 promoters 30- and 60-fold, respectively. TnrA activates expression of the P3 promoter 10-fold in nitrogen-limited cells, while GlnR represses transcription from the P3 promoter 55-fold during growth on excess nitrogen. Expression of the ureABC operon increases 10-fold at the end of exponential growth in nutrient sporulation medium. This elevation in expression results from the relief of CodY-mediated repression during exponential growth and increased sigmaH-dependent transcription during stationary phase.    Catabolite control protein A (CcpA) is a global regulatory protein involved in catabolite repression and glucose activation in Gram-positive bacteria. cis -Acting DNA sequences, catabolite response elements ( cre s), involved in this regulatory system contain a 14 base pair (bp) region of dyad symmetry. CcpA, a repressor of the Lac I family, has been shown to bind specifically to cre s. To better understand cre recognition by CcpA, we have focused on the interaction between CcpA and the amyE cre , called amyO, which is located at the transcription start site of the alpha-amylase gene. DNA-protein complexes were probed with dimethylsulfate (DMS) and N -ethylnitrosourea (EtNU) to identify guanines and phosphates that participate in complex formation. Interaction between amyO and CcpA visualized through methylation protection and interference showed that CcpA contacts guanine residues at the outer bounds of amyO with higher affinity than near the dyad axis. From ethylation interference studies, it was found that CcpA contacts three phosphate groups at each end of amyO, and one or two phosphate groups near the dyad axis. Exonuclease III protection revealed that CcpA protects a 26 bp region centered around the dyad axis of amyO. The isolated N-terminal fragment still specifically bound to the sequence resembling the half sites of the amyO sequence. Considering these findings and the helical structure of B-DNA, our results suggest that each of the two monomers of the CcpA molecule contact the major groove in each half of the region of dyad symmetry and that the contacts are on the same face of the DNA helix, which is typical of bacterial repressor-operator interactions. However, the absence of strong contacts near the dyad axis by CcpA is in contrast to the situation with the gal repressor, another member of the Lac I family of repressors.    The identification of sigma B-dependent general stress proteins is a useful strategy to understand the physiological role of the unspecific stress response in Bacillus subtilis. By N-terminal sequencing of B. subtilis stress proteins Gsp38 was identified as the NAD-synthetase (NadE). NadE was previously characterized as spore outgrowth factor B (OutB) conferring a temperature-sensitive spore outgrowth defective phenotype. Transcriptional studies showed that nadE is strongly induced in response to heat, ethanol and salt stress or after starvation for glucose in a sigma B-dependent manner. Two promoters are involved in transcriptional initiation, the sigma A-dependent upstream promoter contributes to the basal level during growth, whereas the sigma B-dependent downstream promoter is induced after different stress conditions.    A small RNA sequence identified in an rRNA-tRNA cluster from the thermophilic Bacillus sp. strain PS3 was examined. An oligonucleotide probe specific for the RNA bound to multiple restriction fragments in Bacillus sp. strain PS3 DNA, thus several copies of this sequence occur in its genome. Similar findings were observed using DNA from B. subtilis, B. stearothermophilus, Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, Haemophilus influenzae and Thermus thermophilus. This sequence apparently is widespread in the eubacteria. Northern analysis of RNA from sporulating Bacillus sp. strain PS3 and B. subtilis cells revealed RNA species homologous to the probe in both bacteria. Expression of the small RNA in B. subtilis depended on sigma H.    TRAP (trp RNA-binding attenuation protein) is a tryptophan-activated RNA-binding protein that regulates expression of the trp biosynthetic genes by binding to a series of GAG and UAG trinucleotide repeats generally separated by two or three spacer nucleotides. Previously, we showed that TRAP contains 11 identical subunits arranged in a symmetrical ring. Based on this structure, we proposed a model for the TRAP.RNA interaction where the RNA wraps around the protein with each repeat of the RNA contacting one or a combination of two adjacent subunits of the TRAP oligomer. Here, we have shown that RNAs selected in vitro based on their ability to bind tryptophan-activated TRAP contain multiple G/UAG repeats and show a strong bias for pyrimidines as the spacer nucleotides between these repeats. The affinity of the TRAP.RNA interaction displays a nonlinear temperature dependence, increasing between 5 degrees C and 47 degrees C and then decreasing from 47 degrees C to 67 degrees C. Differential scanning calorimetry and circular dichroism spectroscopy demonstrate that TRAP is highly thermostable with few detectable changes in the structure between 25 degrees C and 70 degrees C, suggesting that the temperature dependence of this interaction reflects changes in the RNA. Results from circular dichroism and UV absorbance spectroscopy support this hypothesis, demonstrating that trp leader RNA becomes unstacked upon binding TRAP. We propose that the bias toward pyrimidines in the spacer nucleotides of the in vitro selected RNAs represents the inability of Us and Cs to form stable base stacking interactions, which allows the flexibility needed for the RNA to wrap around the TRAP oligomer.    The phosphorelay signal transduction system activates developmental transcription in sporulation of Bacillus subtilis by phosphorylation of aspartyl residues of the Spo0F and Spo0A response regulators. The phosphorylation level of these response regulators is determined by the opposing activities of protein kinases and protein aspartate phosphatases that interpret positive and negative signals for development in a signal integration circuit. The RapA protein aspartate phosphatase of the phosphorelay is regulated by a peptide that directly inhibits its activity. This peptide is proteolytically processed from an inactive pre-inhibitor protein encoded in the phrA gene. The pre-inhibitor is cleaved by the protein export apparatus to a putative pro-inhibitor that is further processed to the active inhibitor peptide and internalized by the oligopeptide permease. This export-import circuit is postulated to be a mechanism for timing phosphatase activity where the processing enzymes regulate the rate of formation of the active inhibitor. The processing events may, in turn, be controlled by a regulatory hierarchy. Chromosome sequencing has revealed several other phosphatase-prepeptide gene pairs in B. subtilis, suggesting that the use of this mechanism may be widespread in signal transduction.    Intercellular communication is a crucial phenomenon during spore development in Bacillus subtilis. It couples the establishment of a compartment-specific genetic program to the transcriptional activity of a sigma factor in the other compartment. It also keeps sigma factor activation in register with the morphological process. This study used directed mutagenesis to analyse the pathway that couples sigma E activation in the mother-cell to activation of sigma F in the forespore following asymmetric septation. Targets for mutagenesis in SpoIIGA (the receptor) were chosen based on the predicted topology of the protein when associated with the cell membrane. The results showed that a residue near the N terminus (D6), predicted to be exposed outside the cell, is required for receptor activity, whereas the major extracellular loop (between membrane domains IV and V) is dispensable for function. In contrast, mutations in SpoIIR (the signal) that partially blocked protein release (but not membrane translocation) had no effect on signal transduction. These results do not rule out the possibility that uncharacterized molecules intervene in the signalling pathway that establishes the mother-cell-specific developmental program during the early stage of sporulation.    The DNA regions upstream from the genes encoding polypeptides of Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis larvicidal crystals (cry4A, cry4B, cry11A) contain sequences with similarities to the spo0A box of Bacillus subtilis (or &apos;0A&apos; box) and the promoter recognized by the sigma H-associated RNA polymerase of B. subtilis. Expression of cry-lacZ transcriptional fusions was analysed in various B. thuringiensis genetic backgrounds. The early transcription of the toxin genes was not sporulation-dependent, whereas the late-stage expression at t4-6 was sigma E-dependent. Primer extension analysis confirmed that the cry4- and cry11-type toxin genes were weakly transcribed during the transition phase; expression analysis of a cry11A&apos;-lacZ transcriptional fusion in B. subtilis sporulation mutants confirmed the involvement of the sigma H-RNA polymerase. Primer extension analysis showed that in B. thuringiensis subsp. israelensis, the cry4A and cry11A gene transcription observed at the end of the growth stage was turned off at the beginning of the sporulation phase. The DNA region located upstream from the cry11A gene promoter including the putative &apos;0A&apos; box was deleted. This led to a derepression of the expression of the cry11A operon. These results suggest that the cry4A, cry4B and cry11A toxin genes of B. thuringiensis subsp. Israelensis are transcribed during the transition phase by the RNA polymerase associated with the sigma H factor and are subject to Spo0A repression.    The upp gene encoding the major uracil phosphoribosyltransferase (UPRT) of the thermophile Bacillus caldolyticus was cloned by complementation of an Escherichia coli upp mutation. The nucleotide sequence of the cloned DNA revealed an open reading frame of 630 bp encoding a polypeptide of 209 amino acids (M(r) 22,817) with 84% amino acid sequence identity to the deduced upp gene product of Bacillus subtilis. Primer extension analysis indicated that the transcriptional start site of the cloned gene was positioned 37 or 38 bp upstream of the coding region. When over-expressed in E. coli, the recombinant UPRT represented approximately 18% of the soluble cellular proteins. The enzyme was purified to homogeneity by two sequential precipitations with 50 mM Na-phosphate, pH 7.0. Gel filtration chromatography indicated that the native enzyme existed as a dimer at high protein concentrations but that it dissociated to a monomeric form on dilution. In dilute solutions the enzyme is highly unstable but can be stabilized by addition of bovine serum albumin. In concentrated solution (&gt; 5 mg/ml) the enzyme is stable for months at 4 degrees C, even in the absence of bovine serum albumin. By comparing the UPRT activity of crude extracts of B. subtilis and B. caldolyticus it was found that the enzyme from B. caldolyticus was considerably more stable toward thermal inactivation than the homologous enzyme from B. subtilis.    SacY is the antiterminator protein involved in the induction by sucrose of the expression of the levansucrase gene (sacB) of Bacillus subtilis. In the presence of sucrose, SacY is activated and prevents premature termination of transcription by binding to a RNA-antiterminator (RAT) sequence partially overlapping with the terminator sequence. SacY consists of a RNA-binding N-terminal domain, SacY(1-55), and a regulatory domain, SacY(56-280), sensitive to the sucrose concentration. SacY(1-55) is in itself capable of binding to the RAT sequence and preventing termination independently of the sucrose concentration. In this paper we describe the overexpression, the purification, and the crystallization of SacY(1-55). We obtained six different crystal forms, some of them diffracting to high resolution (&gt; 1.5 A). Self rotation function calculations indicated the presence of a dimer in the asymmetric unit, which is in agreement with a proposed oligomeric state in solution as observed by high-resolution NMR measurements. The crystallization of some site-directed cysteine mutants opens the way of solving the structure by multiple isomorphous replacement.    We constructed and characterised a new system to determine transcriptional regulation of genes in Bacillus subtilis. The system is based on the B. stearothermophilus-derived beta-galactosidase BgaB. In contrast to the systems described up to now the BgaB protein is not degraded in response to environmental stresses. We optimised buffer conditions for BgaB assays and developed a protocol which allows measurement of BgaB activity without background problems. To test the system we determined induction of the B. subtilis clpC gene in response to stress. Induction of this gene in response to stress occurred as described.    In Bacillus subtilis, expression of the trp genes is negatively regulated by an RNA binding protein called TRAP (trp RNA-binding Attenuation Protein), which is activated to bind RNA by binding l-tryptophan. TRAP contains 11 identical subunits assembled in a symmetric ring. We have used alanine-scanning mutagenesis to analyze the functions of surface amino acid residues of TRAP. The in vivo regulatory activity of each mutant TRAP was analyzed in a B. subtilis reporter strain containing a trpE&apos;-&apos;lacZ fusion. Mutant TRAP proteins with defective in vivo regulatory activities were characterized in vitro by measuring their tryptophan binding and RNA binding activities. Most of the mutant proteins with altered tryptophan binding, either affinity or cooperativity, contained substituted residues located on two loops formed by residues 25 to 33 and residues 49 to 52, as well as on the beta-strand and beta-turn contiguous with these loops. Substitution of three residues (Lys37, Lys56 and Arg58) with alanine resulted in significant decreases in the RNA binding activity of TRAP without altering tryptophan binding. Structural analysis shows that these three residues are directly aligned on the outer edge of TRAP. Further mutagenic analysis of these three residues revealed that only lysine or arginine residues at positions 37 or 58 allow proper TRAP function, whereas at position 56, only lysine is functional. Residue Asn20 is the only other residue in TRAP that is located on the line formed by residues 37, 56 and 58, and virtually any amino acid residue is functional at position 20. We propose that RNA wraps around TRAP by interacting with residues Lys37, Lys56 and Arg58.    Endospore formation in Bacillus subtilis begins with an asymmetric cell division that partitions the bacterium into mother cell and forespore compartments. Mother cell-specific gene expression is initiated by sigmaE, a transcription factor that is active only in the mother cell but which existed as an inactive precursor (pro-sigmaE) in the predivisional cell. Activation of pro-sigmaE involves the removal of 27 amino acids from its amino terminus. A chimera of pro-sigmaE and the green fluorescent protein (GFP) was expressed from either the normal sigE promoter (P(spoIIG)), which places pro-sigmaE::GFP in both mother cell and forespore compartments, or the forespore-specific promoter (P(dacF)), which produces pro-sigmaE::GFP only in the forespore compartment. The pro-sigmaE::GFP expressed from P(spoIIG), but not P(dacF), was converted to a lower-molecular-weight form by a mechanism dependent on gene products (SpoIIGA and sigmaF) that are essential for normal pro-sigmaE processing. This finding is consistent with the pro-sigmaE processing reaction occurring only in the mother cell compartment. In processing-deficient cells, pro-sigmaE::GFP was found to accumulate at the septal membrane, a location where its processing apparatus would be susceptible to triggering from the adjoining forespore.    A Bacillus subtilis mutant with a deletion of citC, the gene encoding isocitrate dehydrogenase, the third enzyme of the tricarboxylic acid branch of the Krebs cycle, had a greatly reduced ability to sporulate. Analysis of expression of lacZ fusions to various sporulation gene promoters revealed that in the citC mutant development is probably blocked between stage 0 and stage II. That is, genes expressed very early in sporulation, under the direct control of the Spo0A transcription factor, were induced normally in the citC mutant. However, genes expressed after asymmetric septation (stage II) in wild-type cells were not induced in the citC mutant. Analysis of cell morphology by thin-section electron microscopy and immunofluorescence microscopy showed that the mutant formed axial chromosomal filaments and accumulated rings of FtsZ protein at potential polar division sites but failed to form asymmetric division septa, indicating that sporulation is blocked at stage I. The growth and sporulation defects of the B. subtilis citC mutant were fully overcome by introduction and expression of the Escherichia coli icd gene, encoding an isocitrate dehydrogenase similar to the enzyme from B. subtilis.    The Bacillus anthracis toxin genes, cya, lef, and pag, can be viewed as a regulon, in which transcription of all three genes is activated in trans by the same regulatory gene, atxA, in response to the same signal, CO2. In atxA+ strains, toxin gene expression is increased 5- to 20-fold in cells grown in 5% CO2 relative to cells grown in air. CO2-enhanced toxin gene transcription is not observed in atx4-null mutants. Here, we used two independent techniques to obtain evidence for additional CO2-induced atxA-regulated genes. First, total protein preparations from atxA4+ and atxA isolates grown in 5% CO2 and in air were examined by two-dimensional electrophoresis. Comparison of the resulting protein patterns indicated that synthesis of non-toxin proteins is influenced by growth in elevated CO2 and the toxin gene regulator, atxA. Second, we generated random transcriptional lacZ fusions in B. anthracis with transposon Tn917-LTV3. Transposon-insertion libraries were screened for mutants expressing CO2-enhanced atxA-dependent beta-galactosidase activity. DNA sequence analysis of transposon insertion sites in 17 mutants carrying CO2- and atxA-regulated fusions revealed 10 mutants carrying independent insertions on the 185-kb toxin plasmid pXO1 which did not map to the toxin genes. The tcr-lacZ fusion mutants (tcr for toxin coregulated) were Tox+, indicating that these genes may not be involved in anthrax toxin gene activation. Our data indicate a clear association of atxA with CO2-enhanced gene expression in B. anthracis and provide evidence that atxA regulates genes other than the structural genes for the anthrax toxin proteins.    The exopolysaccharide alginate is an important virulence factor in chronic lung infections caused by the bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Two positive activators for alginate synthesis, algB and algR, are members of a superfamily of response regulators of the two-component regulatory system. AlgB belongs to the NtrC subfamily of response regulators and is required for high-level production of alginate. In this study, an open reading frame encoding a polypeptide of 66 kDa, designated kinB, was identified immediately downstream of algB. The sequence of KinB is homologous to the histidine protein kinase members of two-component regulatory systems. Western blot analysis of a P. aeruginosa strain carrying a kinB-lacZ protein fusion and studies of kinB-phoA fusions indicate that KinB localizes to the inner membrane and has a NH2-terminal periplasmic domain. A KinB derivative containing the COOH terminus of KinB was generated and purified. In the presence of [gamma-32P]ATP, the purified COOH-terminal KinB protein was observed to undergo progressive autophosphorylation in vitro. Moreover, the phosphoryl label of KinB could be rapidly transferred to purified AlgB. Substitutions of the residues conserved among histidine protein kinases abolished KinB autophosphorylation. These results provide evidence that kinB encodes the AlgB cognate histidine protein kinase.    The Bacillus subtilis SacY transcriptional antiterminator is a regulator involved in sucrose-promoted induction of the sacB gene. SacY activity is negatively controlled by enzyme I and HPr, the general energy coupling proteins of the phosphoenolpyruvate:sugar phosphotransferase system (PTS), and by SacX, a membranal protein homologous to SacP, the B. subtilis sucrose-specific PTS-permease. Previous studies suggested that the negative control exerted by the PTS on bacterial antiterminators of the SacY family involves phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent phosphorylation by the sugar-specific PTS-permeases. However, data reported herein show direct phosphorylation of SacY by HPr(His approximately P) with no requirement for SacX. Experiments were carried out to determine the phosphorylatable residues in SacY. In silico analyses of SacY and its homologues revealed the modular structure of these proteins as well as four conserved histidines within two homologous domains (here designated P1 and P2), present in 14 distinct mRNA- and DNA-binding bacterial transcriptional regulators. Single or multiple substitutions of these histidyl residues were introduced in SacY by site-directed mutagenesis, and their effects on phosphorylation and antitermination activity were examined. In vitro phosphorylation experiments showed that SacY was phosphorylated on three of the conserved histidines. Nevertheless, in vivo studies using cells bearing a sacB&apos;-lacZ reporter fusion, as well as SacY mutants lacking the phosphorylatable histidyls, revealed that only His-99 is directly involved in regulation of SacY antitermination activity.    The Bacillus subtilis tyrS gene belongs to the T box family of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase and amino acid biosynthesis genes, which are regulated by a common mechanism of transcriptional antitermination. Each gene is induced by specific amino acid limitation; the uncharged cognate tRNA is the effector inducing transcription of the full-length message. The leader regions of the genes in this family share a number of conserved primary sequence and secondary structural elements, the functions of which are unknown. In this study, we examine these regions and report the effects of mutations in several of these elements. In addition, two alternative basepairings in the F box region were found to be necessary for tyrS antitermination.    Previous determination of the nucleotide sequence of the iol region of the Bacillus subtilis genome allowed us to predict the structure of the iol operon for myo-inositol catabolism, consisting of 10 iol genes (iolA to iouJ); iolG corresponds to idh, encoding myo-inositol 2-dehydrogenase (Idh). Primer extension analysis suggested that an inositol-inducible promoter for the iol operon (iol promoter) might be a promoter-like sequence in the 5&apos; region of iolA, which is probably recognized by sigmaA. S1 nuclease analysis implied that a rho-independent terminator-like structure in the 3&apos; region of iolJ might be a terminator for iol transcription. Disruption of the iol promoter prevented synthesis of the iol transcript as well as that of Idh, implying that the iol operon is most probably transcribed as an 11.5-kb mRNA containing the 10 iol genes. Immediately upstream of the iol operon, two genes (iolR and iolS) with divergent orientations to the iol operon were found. Disruption of iolR (but not iolS) caused constitutive synthesis of the iol transcript and Idh, indicating that the iolR gene encodes a transcription-negative regulator (presumably a repressor) for the iol operon. Northern and S1 nuclease analyses revealed that the iolRS genes were cotranscribed from another inositol-inducible promoter, which is probably recognized by sigmaA. The promoter assignments of the iol and iolRS operons were confirmed in vivo with a lacZ fusion integrated into the amyE locus.    Cytochromes of the c type contain covalently bound heme. In bacteria, they are located on the outside of the cytoplasmic membrane. Cytochrome c synthesis involves export of heme and apocytochrome across the cytoplasmic membrane followed by ligation of heme to the polypeptide. Using radioactive protoheme IX produced in Escherichia coli, we show that Bacillus subtilis can use heme from the growth medium for cytochrome c synthesis. The B. subtilis ccdA gene encodes a 26-kDa integral membrane protein which is required for cytochrome c synthesis (T. Schiott et al., J. Bacteriol. 179:1962-1973, 1997). In this work, we analyzed the stage at which cytochrome c synthesis is blocked in a ccdA deletion mutant. The following steps were found to be normal in the mutant: (i) transcription and translation of cytochrome c structural genes, (ii) translocation of apocytochrome across the cytoplasmic membrane, and (iii) heme transport from the cytoplasm to cytochrome polypeptide on the outer side of the cytoplasmic membrane. It is concluded that CcdA is required for a late step in the cytochrome c synthesis pathway.    Clp ATPase chaperone proteins are found in procaryotes and eucaryotes. Recently, ClpC of Bacillus subtilis was found to be part of a regulatory switch(1). ClpC, in combination with the MecA and ComS proteins, regulates the activity of a transcription factor, ComK, which is necessary for the development of genetic competence (the ability to bind and take up exogenous DNA). The complex of ClpC:MecA:ComK renders ComK inactive. Interaction between ComS and the ternary complex releases active ComK. This regulatory switch controls ComK activity in response to cell density signals that affect production of ComS. Regulated interaction between Clp ATPase and target proteins might prove to be widespread.    sigmaF, the first compartment-specific transcription factor in sporulating Bacillus subtilis, is negatively regulated by an anti-sigma factor, SpoIIAB. SpoIIAB has an alternative binding partner, SpoIIAA. To see whether (as has been proposed) SpoIIAB&apos;s binding preference for SpoIIAA or sigmaF depends on the nature of the adenine nucleotide present, we used surface plasmon resonance to measure the dissociation constants of the three complexes SpoIIAA-SpoIIAB-ADP, sigmaF-SpoIIAB-ADP, and sigmaF-SpoIIAB-ATP. The results suggested that SpoIIAB&apos;s choice of binding partner is unlikely to depend on the ATP/ADP ratio in the cell. The intracellular concentrations of sigmaF, SpoIIAB, SpoIIAA, and SpoIIAA-phosphate (SpoIIAA-P) were measured by quantitative immunoblotting between 0 and 3 h after the beginning of sporulation (t0 to t3). sigmaF and SpoIIAB were barely detectable at t0, but their concentrations increased in parallel to reach maxima at about t1.5. SpoIIAA-P increased steadily to a maximum at t3, but nonphosphorylated SpoIIAA was detectable only from t1.5, reached a maximum at t2.5, and then declined. Kinetic studies of the phosphorylation of SpoIIAA catalyzed by SpoIIAB suggested that the reaction was limited by a very slow release of one of the products (SpoIIAA-P or ADP) from SpoIIAB, with a turnover of about once per 20 min. This remarkable kinetic property provides an unexpected mechanism for the regulation of sigmaF. We propose that when SpoIIE (which dephosphorylates SpoIIAA-P) is active at the same time as SpoIIAB, SpoIIAA cycles repeatedly between the phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated forms. This cycling sequesters SpoIIAB in a long-lived complex and prevents it from inhibiting sigmaF.    The recA gene of Mycobacterium tuberculosis has previously been cloned and sequenced (E. O. Davis, S. G. Sedgwick, and M. J. Colston, J. Bacteriol. 173:5653-5662, 1991). In this study, the expression of this gene was shown to be inducible in response to various DNA-damaging agents by using a transcriptional fusion to the reporter gene encoding chloramphenicol acetyltransferase. A segment of DNA around 300 bp upstream of the coding region was shown to be required for expression. However, primer extension analysis indicated that the transcriptional start sites were 47 and 93 bp upstream of the translation initiation codon. Sequence motifs with homology to two families of Escherichia coli promoters but also with significant differences were located near these proposed transcription start sites. The differences from the E. coli consensus patterns would explain the previously described lack of expression of the M. tuberculosis recA gene from its own promoter in E. coli. In addition, the M. tuberculosis LexA protein was shown to bind specifically to a sequence, GAAC-N4-GTTC, overlapping one of these putative promoters and homologous to the Bacillus subtilis Cheo box involved in the regulation of SOS genes. The region of DNA 300 bp upstream of the recA gene was shown not to contain a promoter, suggesting that it functions as an upstream activator sequence.    On a 4.7-kbp HindIII clone of Thermus strain ZO5 DNA, complementing an aspartate carbamoyltransferase mutation in Escherichia coli, we identified a cluster of four potential open reading frames corresponding to genes pyrR, and pyrB, an unidentified open reading frame named bbc, and gene pyrC. The transcription initiation site was mapped at about 115 nucleotides upstream of the pyrR translation start codon. The cognate Thermus pyr promoter also functions in heterologous expression of Thermus pyr genes in E. coli. In Thermus strain ZO5, pyrB and pyrC gene expression is repressed three- to fourfold by uracil and increased twofold by arginine. Based on the occurrence of several transcription signals in the Thermus pyr promoter region and strong amino acid sequence identities (about 60%) between Thermus PyrR and the PyrR attenuation proteins of two Bacillus sp., we propose a regulatory mechanism involving transcriptional attenuation to control pyr gene expression in Thermus. In contrast to pyr attenuation in Bacillus spp., however, control of the Thermus pyr gene cluster would not involve an antiterminator structure but would involve a translating ribosome for preventing formation of the terminator RNA hairpin. The deduced amino acid sequence of Thermus strain ZO5 aspartate carbamoyltransferase (ATCase; encoded by pyrB) exhibits the highest similarities (about 50% identical amino acids) with ATCases from Pseudomonas sp. For Thermus strain ZO5 dihydroorotase (DHOase; encoded by pyrC), the highest similarity scores (about 40% identity) were obtained with DHOases from B. caldolyticus and Bacillus subtilis. The enzyme properties of ATCase expressed from truncated versions of the Thermus pyr gene cluster in E. coli suggest that Thermus ATCase is stabilized by DHOase and that the translation product of bbc plays a role in feedback inhibition of the ATCase-DHOase complex.    The EXG1 gene encoding the main Saccharomyces cerevisiae exo-beta-1,3-glucanase was cloned and over-expressed in yeast. The Bacillus subtilis endo-1,3-1,4-beta-glucanase gene (beg1) and the Butyrivibrio fibrisolvens endo-beta-1,4-glucanase gene (end1) were fused to the secretion signal sequence of the yeast mating pheromone alpha-factor (MF alpha 1S) and inserted between the yeast alcohol dehydrogenase II gene promoter (ADH2P) and terminator (ADH2T). Constructs ADH2P-MF alpha 1S-beg1-ADH2T and ADH2P-MF alpha 1S-end 1-ADH2T designated BEG1 and END1, respectively, were expressed separately and jointly with EXG1 in S. cerevisiae. The construction of fur 1 ura3 S. cerevisiae strains allowed for the autoselection of these multicopy URA3-based plasmids in rich medium. Enzyme assays confirmed that co-expression of EXG1, BEG1 and END1 enhanced glucan degradation by S. cerevisiae.    The DNA-bending protein TF1 is the Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage SPO1-encoded homolog of the bacterial HU proteins and the Escherichia coli integration host factor. We recently proposed that TF1, which binds with high affinity (Kd was approximately 3 nM) to preferred sites within the hydroxymethyluracil (hmU)-containing phage genome, identifies its binding sites based on sequence-dependent DNA flexibility. Here, we show that two hmU-A base pair steps coinciding with two previously proposed sites of DNA distortion are critical for complex formation. The affinity of TF1 is reduced 10-fold when both of these hmU-A base pair steps are replaced with A-hmU, G-C, or C-G steps; only modest changes in affinity result when substitutions are made at other base pairs of the TF1 binding site. Replacement of all hmU residues with thymine decreases the affinity of TF1 greatly; remarkably, the high affinity is restored when the two hmU-A base pair steps corresponding to previously suggested sites of distortion are reintroduced into otherwise T-containing DNA. T-DNA constructs with 3-base bulges spaced apart by 9 base pairs of duplex also generate nM affinity of TF1. We suggest that twin hmU-A base pair steps located at the proposed sites of distortion are key to target site selection by TF1 and that recognition is based largely, if not entirely, on sequence-dependent DNA flexibility.    Sequence-selective transcription by bacterial RNA polymerase (RNAP) requires sigma factor that participates in both promoter recognition and DNA melting. RNAP lacking sigma (core enzyme) will initiate RNA synthesis from duplex ends, nicks, gaps, and single-stranded regions. We have used DNA templates containing short regions of heteroduplex (bubbles) to compare initiation in the presence and absence of various sigma factors. Using bubble templates containing the sigmaD-dependent flagellin promoter, with or without its associated upstream promoter (UP) element, we demonstrate that UP element stimulation occurs efficiently even in the absence of sigma. This supports a model in which the UP element acts primarily through the alpha subunit of core enzyme to increase the initial association of RNAP with the promoter. Core and holoenzyme do differ substantially in the template positions chosen for initiation: sigmaD restricts initiation to sites 8-9 nucleotides downstream of the conserved -10 element. Remarkably, sigmaA also has a dramatic effect on start-site selection even though the sigmaA holoenzyme is inactive on the corresponding homoduplexes. The start sites chosen by the sigmaA holoenzyme are located 8 nucleotides downstream of sequences on the nontemplate strand that resemble the conserved -10 hexamer recognized by sigmaA. Thus, sigmaA appears to recognize the -10 region even in a single-stranded state. We propose that in addition to its described roles in promoter recognition and start-site melting, sigma also localizes the transcription start site.    We undertook to identify the protease(s) involved in the in vivo degradation of the 100 kDa mosquitocidal toxin (Mtx) from Bacillus sphaericus SSII-1 and isolated a B. sphaericus SSII-1 gene flanked upstream by a typical Shine-Dalgarno ribosome binding site and downstream by a strong rho-independent transcription terminator. The predicted ORF encodes a 432 amino acid protein with significant homology throughout its sequence to two subtilisin-like serine proteases from the Antarctic psychrophilic (cold-adapted) bacilli, TA39 and TA41. The predicted N-terminal sequence suggests that the B. sphaericus protease is related to sfericase, a partially characterized serine protease from B. sphaericus. Only B. sphaericus strains which produce Mtx-degrading protease activity harbour the subtilisin-like protease gene, suggesting that this protease may be responsible for or contribute to the degradation of Mtx in B. sphaericus SSII-1. A 36-kDa protease with Mtx-degrading activity and similar properties to sfericase was also purified from sporulated cultures of B. sphaericus SSII-1. Further studies are needed to determine the relationship of this protease to sfericase and to the predicted product of the subtilisin-like serine protease gene.    A major breakthrough in understanding the bacterial cell is the discovery that the cell is highly organized at the level of protein localization. Proteins are positioned at particular sites in bacteria, including the cell pole, the incipient division plane, and the septum. Differential protein localization can control DNA replication, chromosome segregation, and cytokinesis and is responsible for generating daughter cells with different fates upon cell division. Recent discoveries have revealed that progression through the cell cycle and communication between cellular compartments are mediated by two-component signal transduction systems and signaling pathways involving transcription factor activation by proteolytic processing. Asymmetric cell division in Caulobacter crescentus and sporulation in Bacillus subtilis are used as paradigms for the control of the cell cycle and cellular morphogenesis in bacterial cells.    Assessment of specific activity of riboflavin synthase and the level of riboflavin accumulation in strains with a 110-nucleotide deletion in the regulatory region of the riboflavin operon showed that this deletion specified semi-constitutive expression of the operon. This was assumed to be connected with the elimination of three nucleotides from a potential transcription antiterminator.    In Bacillus subtilis, genes involved in arginine and ornithine catabolism constitute two operons, rocABC and rocDEF. Inducible expression of these two operons is SigL-dependent and requires the transcriptional activator RocR. RocR is a member of the NtrC/NifA family of regulators. To study the molecular mechanisms leading to the activation of RocR, we constructed a series of mutants affected in various steps of arginine catabolism. Results obtained using these mutants strongly suggest that the true inducer is ornithine or citrulline. Constitutive mutants of rocR containing either missense mutations, frameshift mutations resulting from deletions, or in-frame deletions leading to the synthesis of N-terminal truncated RocR polypeptides were obtained. Analysis of these mutants indicates that the N-terminal part of RocR is an intramolecular repressor domain. AhrC is a second positive regulatory protein of the rocABC and rocDEF operons. Two missense mutations modifying the N-terminal domain of RocR led to high constitutive expression of the Roc regulon in the absence of AhrC. Constitutive RocR proteins still require the presence of UAS1 and therefore probably bending of the DNA region located between the UAS1 and the promoter, suggesting that AhrC is not involved in DNA bending which facilitates interaction between RocR and sigma54-RNA polymerase. We suggest that the positive role of AhrC involves protein-protein interaction with RocR.    Bacillus subtilis responds to signals of environmental and metabolic stress by inducing over 40 general stress genes under the control of the sigma B transcription factor. sigma B activity is regulated post-translationally by a multi-component network composed of two coupled partner-switching modules, RsbX-RsbS-RsbT and RsbU-RsbV-RsbW, each containing a serine phosphatase (X or U), an antagonist protein (S or V), and a switch protein/serine kinase (T or W). The upstream module (X-S-T) is required to transmit signals of environmental stress. In contrast, the downstream module (U-V-W) is required to transmit signals of energy stress as well as the environmental signals conveyed to it from the upstream module. Until now the function of the rsbR gene product was unknown. RsbR shares significant sequence similarity with the RsbS and RsbV antagonist proteins whose phosphorylation states control key protein-protein interactions within their respective modules. Here we present evidence that RsbR is associated with RsbS in the upstream, environmental-sensing module. To investigate RsbR function, we constructed deletion and point mutations within rsbR and tested their effects on expression of sigma B-dependent reporter fusions, both singly and in combination with other rsb mutations. To determine the possible interaction of RsbR with other Rsb proteins, we tested the ability of wild-type or mutant RsbR to activate transcription in the yeast two-hybrid system in conjunction with other Rsb regulators. On the basis of this genetic analysis, we conclude that RsbR is a positive regulator which modulates sigma B activity in response to salt and heat stress. Our data further suggest that: (i) RsbR influences the antagonist function of RsbS by direct protein-protein interaction; and (ii) this interaction with RsbS is likely controlled by the phosphorylation state of RsbR.    Bacillus sp. TS-23 amylase gene was amplified by polymerase chain reaction and cloned into the pET23(+) transcription vector. Lactose induction of Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) cells harbouring this recombinant plasmid resulted in the extracellular production of gene products. By the addition of 20 mmol l-1 lactose, the amylase activity of fermentation broth had a specific activity of 21 U mg-1 of protein.    A maternally determined seed defect has been obtained by downregulation of the petunia MADS box genes Floral Binding Protein 7 (FBP7) and FBP11. These genes have been previously shown to play central roles in the determination of ovule identity. Aberrant development of the seed coat and consequent degeneration of the endosperm have been observed in transgenic plants in which these two genes are downregulated by cosuppression. Analysis of the expression pattern of FBP7 and FBP11 and genetic analysis confirmed the maternal inheritance of the phenotype. The FBP7 promoter was cloned and fused to reporter genes. One of these reporter genes was the BARNASE gene for targeted cell ablation. Our results indicate that FBP7 promoter activity is restricted to the seed coat of developing seeds and that it is completely silent in the gametophytically derived tissues. The mutants used in this study provided a unique opportunity to investigate one of the poorly understood aspects of seed development: the interaction of embryo, endosperm, and maternal tissues.    Piperacillin resistance in Streptococcus pneumoniae was mediated by mutations in a novel gene, cpoA, that also confer transformation deficiency and a decrease in penicillin-binding protein la. cpoA is part of an operon located downstream of the primary sigma factor of S. pneumoniae. The deduced protein, CpoA, and the peptide encoded by the adjacent 3&apos; open reading frame contained domains homologous to glycosyltransferases of procaryotes and eucaryotes that act on membrane-associated substrates, such as enzymes functioning in lipopolysaccharide core biosynthesis of gram-negative bacteria, RodD of Bacillus subtilis, which is involved in teichoic acid biosynthesis, and the human PIG-A protein, which is required for early steps of glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor biosynthesis. This suggests that the cpo operon has a similar function related to cell surface components.    We used immunofluorescence microscopy to investigate mechanisms governing the establishment of cell-specific gene transcription during sporulation in the bacterium Bacillus subtilis. The transcription factors sigma E and sigma F are synthesized shortly after the start of sporulation but do not become active in directing gene transcription until after polar division, when the activity of sigma E is confined to the mother cell and the activity of sigma F is restricted to the forespore. We show that shortly after septation, sigma E and its proprotein precursor pro-sigma E appear to be absent from the forespore and that a null mutation in spoIIIE, a gene known to be required for the translocation of a chromosome into the forespore, allows sigma E and/or pro-sigma E to persist and sigma E to become active in the forespore. These findings suggest that the loss of sigma E/pro-sigma E from the forespore contributes to the compartmentalization of sigma E-directed gene transcription. We also investigated the distribution of SpoIIE, a regulatory phosphatase required for the activation of sigma F which exhibits a bipolar pattern of localization shortly after the start of sporulation. Normally, SpoIIE rapidly disappears from the sporangium, first from the mother-cell pole and then from the forespore pole. Here we show that a null mutation in spoIIIE causes the SpoIIE phosphatase to persist at both poles. The persistence of the SpoIIE phosphatase at the mother-cell pole could explain the lack of compartmentalization of sigma F activity observed in a spoIIIE null mutant. We conclude that the establishment of cell-specific gene transcription involves the loss of sigma E/pro-sigma E from the forespore and the loss of the SpoIIE phosphatase from the mother-cell pole and that both processes are dependent upon the SpoIIIE protein.    We show that the htpG gene of Bacillus subtilis is induced by heat, as has been reported for the Escherichia coli homolog. Analysis of different mutants revealed that the htpG gene belongs to class III heat shock genes in B. subtilis. An about 10-fold induction after thermal upshock was found at the levels of both transcription and translation, and this induction resulted from enhanced synthesis of mRNA. By primer extension, we identified one potential transcription start site immediately downstream of a putative sigmaA-dependent promoter which became activated after thermal upshift. Northern blot analysis revealed that htpG is part of a monocistronic transcriptional unit. An operon fusion where the complete region between htpG and its upstream gene was fused to the bgaB reporter gene accurately reflected htpG expression. Analysis of this fusion revealed that, in contrast to other class III heat shock genes, htpG was not induced by osmotic upshock, by ethanol, or by oxygen limitation, suggesting that it belongs to a subgroup within class III. Deletion of the region upstream of the putative promoter resulted in an enhanced basal level of htpG expression, but the 10-fold induction was retained, suggesting that the upstream sequences are involved in the regulation of expression in the absence of heat shock.    The characterization of a three-gene operon (the thiC operon) at 331 min, which is involved in thiamine biosynthesis in Bacillus subtilis, is described. The first gene in the operon is homologous to transcription activators in the lysR family. The second and third genes (thiK and thiC) have been subcloned and overexpressed in Escherichia coli. ThiK (30 kDa) catalyzes the phosphorylation of 4-methyl-5-(beta-hydroxyethyl)thiazole. ThiC (27 kDa) catalyzes the substitution of the pyrophosphate of 2-methyl-4-amino-5-hydroxymethylpyrimidine pyrophosphate by 4-methyl-5-(beta-hydroxyethyl)thiazole phosphate to yield thiamine phosphate. Transcription of the thiC operon is not regulated by thiamine or 2-methyl-4-amino-5-hydroxymethylpyrimidine and is only slightly repressed by 4-methyl-5-(beta-hydroxyethyl)thiazole.    Amino acid sequence analysis of tryptic peptides derived from purified penicillin-binding protein PBP2a of Bacillus subtilis identified the coding gene (now termed pbpA) as yqgF, which had been sequenced as part of the B. subtilis genome project; pbpA encodes a 716-residue protein with sequence similarity to class B high-molecular-weight PBPs. Use of a pbpA-lacZ fusion showed that pbpA was expressed predominantly during vegetative growth, and the transcription start site was mapped using primer extension analysis. Insertional mutagenesis of pbpA resulted in no changes in the growth rate or morphology of vegetative cells, in the ability to produce heat-resistant spores, or in the ability to trigger spore germination when compared to the wild type. However, pbpA spores were unable to efficiently elongate into cylindrical cells and were delayed significantly in spore outgrowth. This provides evidence that PBP2a is involved in the synthesis of peptidoglycan associated with cell wall elongation in B. subtilis.    The sigX gene, identified as part of the international effort to sequence the Bacillus subtilis genome, has been proposed to encode an alternative sigma factor of the extracytoplasmic function (ECF) subfamily. The sigX gene is cotranscribed with a downstream gene, ypuN, during logarithmic and early stationary phases of growth. We now report that strains lacking sigma(X) are impaired in the ability to survive at high temperature whereas a ypuN mutant has increased thermotolerance. We overproduced and purified sigma(X) from Escherichia coli and demonstrate that in vitro, both sigma(A) and sigma(X) holoenzymes recognize promoter elements within the sigX-ypuN control region. However, they have distinct salt optima such that sigma(A)-dependent transcription predominates at low salt while sigma(X)-dependent transcription predominates at high salt. A 54-bp region upstream of sigX suffices as a sigma(X)-dependent promoter in vivo, demonstrating that sigX is at least partially under positive autoregulatory control. Mutation of ypuN increases expression from the sigma(X)-dependent promoter in vivo, suggesting that ypuN may encode a negative regulator of sigma(X) activity.    The clinical and histopathological manifestations of syphilis and the invasive behavior of Treponema pallidum in tissue culture systems reflect the propensity for treponemes to migrate through skin, hematogenously disseminate, and invade targeted tissues. Treponemal motility is believed to be essential to this process and thereby an important facet of syphilis pathogenesis. By analogy with other bacterial pathogens, it is plausible that treponemal motility and tissue invasion are modulated by sensory transduction events associated with chemotactic responses. Recent studies have demonstrated the existence in T. pallidum of accessory molecules typically associated with sensory transduction events involving methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins (MCPs). Intrinsic radiolabeling of T. pallidum in vitro with L-[methyl-3H] methionine revealed one methylated treponemal polypeptide with an apparent molecular mass of 64 kDa. A degenerate oligonucleotide probe corresponding to a highly conserved C-terminal domain within Bacillus subtilis and Escherichia coli MCPs was used in Southern blotting of T. pallidum DNA to identify and subsequently clone a putative T. pallidum MCP gene (mcp1). Computer analyses predicted a near-consensus promoter upstream of mcp1, and primer extension analysis employing T. pallidum RNA revealed a transcriptional initiation site. T. pallidum mcp1 encoded a 579-amino-acid (64.6-kDa) polypeptide which was highly homologous to at least 69 other known or putative sensory transducer proteins, with the highest degrees of homology existing between the C terminus of mcp1 and the C-terminal (signaling) domains of the other bacterial MCPs. Other salient features of Mcp1 included (i) six potential membrane-spanning domains at the N terminus, (ii) two predicted alpha-helical coiled coil regions containing at least three putative methylation sites, and (iii) homologies with two ligand-binding domains (LI-1 and LI-2) of the E. coli MCPs Trg and Tar. This study is the first to provide both metabolic and genetic evidence for an MCP sensory transducer in T. pallidum. The combined findings prompt key questions regarding the relationship(s) among sensory transduction, regulation of endoflagellar rotation, and chemotactic responses (in particular, the role of glucose) during virulence expression by T. pallidum.    Motility has been implicated in the invasive process of Borrelia burgdorferi (Bb), the etiologic agent of Lyme disease. To identify Bb motility related genes, we used a method termed &apos;semi-random PCR chromosome walking&apos; (SRPCW) to walk through a large motility gene cluster. The major advantage of this approach over other PCR walking methods is that it employs a secondary PCR amplification of cloned fragments which can be readily sequenced and analyzed. Starting with a primer specific to flgE, we identified and sequenced 14 open reading frames (ORFs) spanning 11 kb downstream of the flgE gene. The genes identified include flbD, motA, motB, fliL, fliM, fliN, fliZ, fliP, fliQ, fliR, flhB, flhA, flhF and flbE. Twelve of the deduced proteins shared extensive homology with flagellar proteins from other bacteria. The gene products and order of genes within this cluster are most similar to those of Treponema pallidum (Tp) and Bacillus subtilis (Bs). One of the unique genes identified, flbD, demonstrated homology to an ORF from the same operon of Tp. Another ORF, flbE, showed similarity to genes from both Tp and Bs. RT-PCR and primer extension analysis revealed that this gene cluster is transcribed as a single unit indicating that it is part of a large motility operon spanning more than 21 kb. Antisera to Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium FliN, FliM, FlhB and FlhA reacted with proteins of the predicted molecular weights in cell lysates of Bb. The results suggest that the flagellar system is highly conserved in evolution and thus underscore the importance of motility in bacterial survival and pathogenesis.    The production of cyclodextrin glucanotransferase (CGTase) by Bacillus ohbensis is dependent on the presence of starch and inhibited by glucose in the medium. Northern blot analysis revealed that the CGTase gene (cgt) was transcribed to almost the same level irrespective of the presence or absence of starch, but glucose completely repressed the transcription. Furthermore, a relatively high amount of CGTase protein was detected on Western blotting only in the medium with starch, showing the lack of posttranslational control of the CGTase activity. These findings suggest some starch induction mechanism for the cgt gene, possibly at the posttranscriptional level, besides negative transcriptional regulation by glucose.    A clone that can complement both Escherichia coli hemB and hemL mutations was found among plasmids containing the Propionibacterium freudenreichii hemB gene, which encodes delta-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase. The regions upstream and downstream of the hemB gene were sequenced. Two open-reading frames (ORF1 and -2), which were similar to the hemY gene encoding protoporphyrinogen oxidase and the hemH gene encoding ferrochelatase from Bacillus subtilis, were found upstream of the hemB gene. ORF1 and -2 complemented the E. coli hemG mutation, defective in protoporphyrinogen oxidase, and the hemH gene respectively. Since ORF1 had no homology to hemG, the gene was designated hemY. The hemYHB genes appeared to be within the same transcription unit. Downstream from the hemB gene, three open-reading frames were found. One of these, transcribed in the same direction as the hemB gene, was identical to be the hemL gene, which encodes glutamate-1-semialdehyde 2,1-aminomutase. The other two open-reading frames, located between the hemYHB and hemL genes, were transcribed divergently, and their deduced amino acid sequences showed similarities to a membrane-bound transport protein and a transcriptional regulatory protein respectively. The two genes may thus be involved in hem transport and the regulation of hem gene expression respectively, and were tentatively named hemX and hemR. Although hemX and hemL are unlikely to be part of the same operon, hemYHBXRL are clustered on the P. freudenreichii chromosome.    Within the framework of the European project to sequence the whole Bacillus subtilis 168 genome, a 23911 bp long chromosomal DNA fragment located around 233 degrees on the B. subtilis genetic map was cloned and sequenced. From the generated sequencing data and the results of the homology search, the primary structure of this region was determined. In addition to the whole lev operon, the region contains putative genes for an amino acid permease, two different alcohol dehydrogenases, a chitosanase, a protein belonging to the LysR family of transcriptional regulators, a protein related to the MerR transcriptional regulator, up to four proteins related to the product of the spoF gene, and genes coding for nine more inferred proteins of unknown function.    The delta A factor of Bacillus subtilis DB1005 contains two amino acid substitutions (I198A and I202A) in the promoter-10 binding region. It has been confirmed that this delta factor is responsible for the temperature sensitivity of B. subtilis DB1005. An investigation was conducted into how the mutant delta A could cause temperature-sensitive (Ts) cell growth by analysing its structural stability, cellular concentration and transcriptional activity. The mutant delta A was unstable even at the permissive temperature of 37 degrees C (t1/2 59 min), whereas the wild-type counterpart was fairly stable under the same conditions (t1/2 &gt; 600 min). However, neither wild-type delta A nor mutant delta A was stable at 49 degrees C (t1/2 34 min and 23 min, respectively). Analyses of the rates of delta A synthesis revealed that B. subtilis DB1005 was able to compensate for unstable delta A by elevating the level of delta A at 37 degrees C but not at 49 degrees C. Moreover, overexpression of the mutant delta A at 49 degrees C could not suppress the Ts phenotype of B. subtilis DB1005. This indicates that the temperature sensitivity of B. subtilis DB1005 is not due to insufficient delta A concentration in the cell. The greater decline of an already reduced activity of the mutant delta A at 49 degrees C suggests that the temperature sensitivity of B. subtilis DB1005 is instead the result of a very low activity of delta A; probably below a critical level necessary for cell growth.    The Bacillus subtilis BofA protein is involved in regulation of pro-sigma K processing in the mother cell during the late stages of sporulation. A computer analysis of the BofA amino acid sequence indicates that it is an integral membrane protein. To determine the membrane topology of the protein, a series of gene fusions of bofA with lacZ or phoA reporter genes in Escherichia coli were analysed. A BofA topological model with two membrane-spanning segments, and with the N- and the C-terminal domains located in the region between the inner and outer membranes surrounding the forespore is presented. The analysis of different modifications of the last five amino acid residues of the BofA protein, obtained by PCR site-directed mutagenesis, suggests a possible role of the C-terminal domain in the regulation of pro-sigma K processing.    A cluster of citrulline biosynthetic genes has been cloned and sequenced from a fragment of Lactobacillus plantarum CCM 1904 (ATCC 8014) DNA isolated as complementing a Bacillus subtilis argF mutation. The gene order was carA-argCJBDF, with carA transcribed divergently from the arg cluster. Although other gram-positive bacteria show similar arg clusters, this arrangement for carA is thus far unprecedented. Downstream from the arg cluster, two open reading frames (ORF7 and ORF8) having unknown functions were found. Sequence analysis of the end of a 10.5-kb cloned DNA fragment showed that argF was 3.5 kb from the ldhL gene coding for L-(+)-lactate dehydrogenase. A tree representation of amino acid sequence clustering relationships of 31 ornithine carbamoyltransferases (OTCases) from various organisms revealed two prokaryotic groups: one with ArgF of L. plantarum and one with ArgF of B. subtilis, which are paralogous. This divergence was not observed in vivo because an L. plantarum argF mutant (AM 1215) harboring no OTCase activity was complemented by the argF genes of L. plantarum and B. subtilis. No OTCase activity was detectable when L. plantarum was grown in the presence of saturating amounts of arginine or citrulline. Arginine may repress the citrulline biosynthetic genes in L. plantarum by using 11 identified DNA motifs which resemble the Escherichia coli ARG box consensus and which are in most cases separated by multiples of 11 bp, corresponding to a DNA helical turn. The carA and argCJBDF genes are divergently transcribed. Their putative promoters are 6 bp apart and are partially overlapped by putative ARG boxes, suggesting concerted transcription regulation.    The trpG gene of Bacillus subtilis encodes a glutamine amidotransferase subunit which is involved in the biosynthesis of L-tryptophan and folic acid. The trp RNA-binding attenuation protein (TRAP) is involved in controlling expression of trpG at the level of translation in response to changes in the intracellular concentration of tryptophan. We performed in vitro experiments using purified TRAP to elucidate the mechanism of TRAP-dependent trpG regulation. A TRAP-trpG RNA footprint analysis showed that tryptophan-activated TRAP interacts with one UAG, one AAG, and seven GAG repeats present in the trpG transcript. Results from ribosome and TRAP toeprint experiments indicated that the ribosome and TRAP binding sites overlap. Experiments with a B. subtilis cell-free translation system demonstrated that TRAP inhibits TrpG synthesis. Thus, TRAP regulates translation of trpG by blocking ribosome access to the trpG ribosome binding site. Our results are consistent with a model in which each tryptophan-activated TRAP subunit interacts with one trinucleotide repeat in an RNA target, thereby wrapping the transcript around the periphery of the TRAP complex.    The xpt and pbuX genes from Bacillus subtilis were cloned, and their nucleotide sequences were determined. The xpt gene encodes a specific xanthine phosphoribosyltransferase, and the pbuX gene encodes a xanthine-specific purine permease. The genes have overlapping coding regions, and Northern (RNA) blot analysis indicated an operon organization. The translation of the second gene, pbuX, was strongly dependent on the translation of the first gene, xpt. Expression of the operon was repressed by purines, and the effector molecules appear to be hypoxanthine and guanine. When hypoxanthine and guanine were added together, a 160-fold repression was observed. The regulation of expression was at the level of transcription, and we propose that a transcription termination-antitermination control mechanism similar to the one suggested for the regulation of the purine biosynthesis operon exists. The expression of the xpt-pbuX operon was reduced when hypoxanthine served as the sole nitrogen source. Under these conditions, the level of the hypoxanthine- and xanthine-degrading enzyme, xanthine dehydrogenase, was induced more than 80-fold. The xanthine dehydrogenase level was completely derepressed in a glnA (glutamine synthetase) genetic background. Although the regulation of the expression of the xpt-pbuX operon was found to be affected by the nitrogen source, it was normal in a glnA mutant strain. This result suggests the existence of different signalling pathways for repression of the transcription of the xpt-pbuX operon and the induction of xanthine dehydrogenase.    Genes from Bacillus subtilis predicted to encode a phosphate-specific transport (Pst) system were shown by mutation to affect high-affinity Pi uptake but not arsenate resistance or phosphate (Pho) regulation. The transcription start of the promoter upstream of the pstS gene was defined by primer extension. The promoter contains structural features analogous to the Escherichia coli pst promoter but not sequence similarity. Expression from this promoter was induced &gt;5,000-fold upon phosphate starvation and regulated by the PhoP-PhoR two-component regulatory system. These data indicate that the pst operon is involved in phosphate transport and is a member of the Pho regulon but is not involved in Pi regulation.    We have sequenced the valyl-tRNA synthetase gene (valS) of Bacillus subtilis and found an open reading frame coding for a protein of 880 amino acids with a molar mass of 101,749. The predicted amino acid sequence shares strong similarity with the valyl-tRNA synthetases from Bacillus stearothermophilus, Lactobacillus casei, and Escherichia coli. Extracts of B. subtilis strains overexpressing the valS gene on a plasmid have increased valyl-tRNA aminoacylation activity. Northern analysis shows that valS is cotranscribed with the folC gene (encoding folyl-polyglutamate synthetase) lying downstream. The 300-bp 5&apos; noncoding region of the gene contains the characteristic regulatory elements, T box, &quot;specifier codon&quot; (GUC), and rho-independant transcription terminator of a gene family in gram-positive bacteria that encodes many aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases and some amino acid biosynthetic enzymes and that is regulated by tRNA-mediated antitermination. We have shown that valS expression is induced by valine limitation and that the specificity of induction can be switched to threonine by changing the GUC (Val) specifier triplet to ACC (Thr). Overexpression of valS from a recombinant plasmid leads to autorepression of a valS-lacZ transcriptional fusion. Like induction by valine starvation, autoregulation of valS depends on the presence of the GUC specifier codon. Disruption of the valS gene was not lethal, suggesting the existence of a second gene, as is the case for both the thrS and the tyrS genes.    A large motility operon, referred to as the flgB operon, was identified, characterized, and mapped at 310 to 320 kb on the linear chromosome of the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi. This is the first report that a sigma70-like promoter rather than a sigma28-like promoter is involved in the transcription of a major motility operon in bacteria. From these results in conjunction with results from a previous study (Y. Ge and N. W. Charon, Gene, in press), we have identified 26 genes in this operon that are relevant to motility and flagellar synthesis. With few exceptions, the gene order and deduced gene products were most similar to those of other spirochetes and Bacillus subtilis. Primer extension analysis indicated that transcription initiated from a conserved sigma70-like promoter immediately upstream of flgB; this promoter mapped within the heat-shock-induced protease gene hslU. Reverse transcriptase PCR analysis indicated that a single transcript of 21 kb initiated at this promoter and extended through flgE and (with our previous results) onto the putative motility gene flbE. The flgB promoter element had strong activity in both Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium. As expected, a mutant of S. typhimurium with an inactivated flagellum-specific sigma28 factor did not affect the function of this promoter. Western blot analysis indicated that B. burgdorferi recombinant FliG and FliI were antigenically similar to those of E. coli and other spirochetes. Although complementation of E. coli or S. typhimurium fliG or fliI mutants with the B. burgdorferi genes was unsuccessful, B. burgdorferi recombinant FliI completely inhibited flagellar synthesis and motility of wild-type E. coli and S. typhimurium. These results show that spirochete motility genes can influence flagellar synthesis in other species of bacteria. Finally, Western blot analysis with sera from infected humans and animals indicated a weak or nondetectable response to recombinant FliG and FliI. These results indicate that these antigens are not favorable candidate reagents to be used in the diagnosis of Lyme disease.    Exoprotease production in Bacillus subtilis is positively regulated by a two-component regulatory system, DegS-DegU, and, in addition, by several minor factors. The product of the degR gene belongs to the latter group and exerts a positive effect in a DegS-DegU dependent manner. We found that transcription of degR was prevented by disruption of either mecA or mecB but was relieved by further disruption of comK. Disruption of comK alone, however, did not alter degR transcription. We also found that the mecA mutation requires a region around position -52 relative to the transcription start point of degR to exert its effect. We have shown previously that the transcription of degR is driven by an alternative sigma factor, sigmaD. When degR expression was directed by an artificially constructed sigmaA-type promoter, disruption of mecA/B did not result in any significant decrease in degR expression, indicating that the negative effect of the mec mutations acts through sigmaD-driven transcription. It has been demonstrated that MecA and MecB negatively regulate ComK, and mecA/B null mutations cause enhanced expression of comK. From these results we conclude that ComK negatively regulates degR expression by preventing sigmaD-driven transcription of degR, possibly through interaction with the control region.    A central step in promoter activation by RNA polymerase (RNAP) is the localized separation of the DNA strands to form the transcription bubble. We have used potassium permanganate footprinting to monitor DNA strand-separation by the Bacillus subtilis sigmaD RNAP at the strong promoter, Phag, directing transcription of flagellin. The susceptibility of individual thymine bases to permanganate oxidation is influenced by temperature, Mg2+, nucleotides, and the RNAP delta subunit. In the absence of delta, sigmaD RNAP establishes a partially opened complex even at 0 degrees C with permanganate reactivity localized between -11 and -4 (RP(-4)). The region of strand separation expands to near -1 at 20 degrees C (RP(-1)) and to +3 at 40 degrees C (RP(+3)). The delta subunit inhibits the downstream propagation of the transcription bubble and thereby increases the concentration of early intermediates in the melting pathway. Indeed, E delta sigmaD forms a distinct nucleated complex (RPn) at 0 degrees C with a structural distortion localized to an AT base step within the -10 element. We propose a model for promoter melting in which strand separation nucleates within the conserved -10 consensus and subsequently propagates downstream. Mg2+ and nucleoside triphosphates (NTPs) favor the downstream propagation of the transcription bubble and strongly stimulate the RP(-1) to RP(+3) conversion. The NTP effects are apparently mediated by binding of substrate to the initiating NTP site: purines are more effective than pyrimidines and GMP alone can greatly increase the level of DNA-melting. The binding of substrates, but not Mg2+ alone, can effectively overcome the anti-melting effect of delta.    A fragment (172 bp) of B. subtilis phage phi29 DNA, which does not contain a functional promoter for phage transcription, has been shown to direct transcription in the promoter-probe plasmid pPV33. The promoter candidate found in this fragment by the computer method of acceptability is compared with cryptic promoters selected by this computer method. It is characterized in vitro by electron microscopic visualization of RNA polymerase binding and &apos;run off&apos; transcription, and in vivo by high resolution S1 mapping.    A new cryI-related sequence designated cryIM was cloned using an immunoscreening technique from ssp. wuhanensis of Bacillus thuringiensis (BT), previously reported to produce multiple Cry proteins [Chestukhina et al. (1994) Can. J. Microbiol. 240, 1026-1034]. Analysis of the cryIM nucleotide sequence revealed an ORF, BTII-type promoter-like sequence, peculiar for such genes, a translation initiation element and a putative transcription terminator. Nevertheless, its product was not previously found in the crystals of the host strain [Chestukhina et al. (1994) Can. J. Microbiol. 240, 1026-1034] which shows its weak or absent natural expression. The amino acid sequence of 1151 residues encoded by the continuous reading frame of cryIM is not identical but is essentially similar to the other delta-endotoxins of the CryI class. An IS231-like sequence was found 400 bp downstream of the cryIM stop codon and a fragment of the cryIAb gene was located 3 kb upstream of its initiator codon in the same orientation. Artificial expression of the cloned gene in E. coli under the control of the lacZ promoter allowed us to obtain its hypothetical protein product.    The two major virulence factors of Bacillus anthracis are the tripartite toxin and the polyglutamate capsule, which are encoded by genes on the large plasmids, pXO1 and pXO2, respectively. The genes atxA, located on pXO1, and acpA, located on pXO2, encode positive trans-acting proteins that are involved in bicarbonate-mediated regulation of toxin and capsule production, respectively. A derivative strain cured of pXO1 produced less capsular substance than the parent strain harbouring both pXO1 and pXO2, and electroporation of the strain cured of pXO1 with a plasmid containing the cloned atxA gene resulted in an increased level of capsule production. An acpA-null mutant was complemented by not only acpA but also the atxA gene. The cap region, which is essential for encapsulation, contains three genes capB, capC, and capA, arranged in that order. The atxA gene stimulated capsule synthesis from the cloned cap region. Transcriptional analysis of cap by RNA slot-blot hybridization and primer-extension analysis revealed that atxA activated expression of cap in trans at the transcriptional level. These results indicate that cross-talk occurs, in which the pXO1-located gene, atxA, activates transcription of the cap region genes located on pXO2. We identified two major apparent transcriptional start sites, designated P1 and P2, located at positions 731 bp and 625 bp, respectively, upstream of the translation-initiation codon of capB. Transcription initiated from P1 and P2 was activated by both atxA and acpA, and activation appeared to be stimulated by bicarbonate. Deletion analysis of the upstream region of the cap promoter revealed that activation by both atxA and acpA required a DNA segment of 70 bp extending upstream of the P1 site. These results suggest that cross-talk by atxA to the genes encoding capsule synthesis is caused by the interaction of the atxA gene product with a regulatory sequence upstream of cap.    The Bacillus subtilis folate operon contains nine genes. The first six genes are involved in the biosynthesis of folic acid and tryptophan and have been characterized previously. The 3&apos;-region of the folate operon contains three additional ORFs: orf3, potentially encoding a DNA-binding protein of 68 amino acids, orf4, encoding a protein of 338 amino acids with homology to the Orf1 of the E. coli fis operon, and a putative lysyl-tRNA synthetase gene (LysS). Four transcripts were identified which encode the first two, eight or all nine proteins or only the last protein LysS. The folate operon contains two promoters, one upstream of the first gene and the second preceding LysS. Transcription of the entire folate operon starts 33 bp upstream of the ATG codon of pab, the first gene of the operon. The mtrB-encoded trp RNA-binding attenuation protein (TRAP) dramatically reduces the steady-state levels of the folate operon transcripts encoding the first eight and all nine proteins, but only has a relatively small effect on the steady-state level of the 2.1 kb transcript encoding the first two genes of the operon, pab and trpG. In addition, transcription of the folate operon is regulated in a growth-phase-dependent manner. Transcripts were present in very low levels after mid-exponential phase, but were dramatically increased directly after transfer of the cells to fresh medium. These results indicate that transcription of the folate operon is regulated by TRAP and also depends on the growth phase of the culture.    Xylose uptake in Bacillus megaterium depends on expression of a putative H+/xylose symporter encoded by xylT, the last gene in the xyl operon. Insertional inactivation of xylT leads to an apparent uptake deficiency determined with whole cells and severely slower growth on xylose as sole carbon source. Expression of xylT is xylose inducible and subject to carbon catabolite repression mediated by CcpA and cre. Northern analysis of the xyl mRNA reveals that a potential stem-loop structure located in the non-translated region between xylA and xylB presumably acts as a transcriptional terminator, as it leads to different amounts of the respective mRNA sections: the 5&apos;-xylA portion is very abundant, while the 3&apos;-xylBT portion constitutes only a fraction of it. XylT has an apparent Michaelis constant (KM) of approx. 100 microM and is competitively inhibited by glucose with an inhibitor constant KI of 16 mM.    The ftsH gene of Bacillus subtilis has been identified as a general stress gene which is transiently induced after thermal or osmotic upshift. The FtsH protein exhibits 70.1% homology to FtsH of Escherichia coli which constitutes an essential ATP- and Zn(2+)-dependent protease anchored in the cytoplasmic membrane via two N-terminal transmembrane domains. This paper describes the isolation and functional characterization of an ftsH null mutant which was obtained by integration of a cat-cassette near the 5&apos; end of ftsH, thereby preventing the synthesis of FtsH protein. In contrast to the situation in E. coli, ftsH is dispensable in B. subtilis but results in a pleiotropic phenotype. While the mutant cells grew mostly as large filaments under physiological conditions, they turned out to be extremely sensitive to heat and salt stress. Although ftsH is necessary for adaptation to heat, it is not involved in the regulation of the heat-shock response. The induction profiles of representative genes of the CIRCE and sigma-B regulon and class III heat-shock genes ion and clpC were identical in the wild type and the ftsH null mutant. Furthermore, the ftsH knockout strain was unable to sporulate, and this failure was probably due to the absence of Spo0A protein which is essential for entry into the sporulation programme. In addition, secretion of bulk exoproteins was severely impaired in the ftsH null mutant after entry into stationary phase. The alpha-amylase and subtilisin activity in the supernatant was specifically tested. Whereas the activity of alpha-amylase increased after entry into stationary phase in both the wild type and the ftsH mutant strain, that of subtilisin encoded by aprE was prevented at the level of transcription in the mutant. Most of these results can be explained by the failure to synthesize appropriate amounts of Spo0A protein in the ftsH null mutant and point to ftsH as a developmental checkpoint.    To study the role of mRNA termination in the regulation of ermK, we introduced mismatches into terminators by in vitro mutagenesis. In wild-type ermK, only truncated transcription products were detected in the absence of induction. In contrast, only the full-length transcript was synthesized in the terminator 1 and terminator 2 double mutants, even in the absence of erythromycin. These results indicate that the expression of ermK is primarily regulated by transcriptional attenuation rather than translational attenuation. We also tested the possible contribution of translational attenuation control to the regulation of ermK by constructing a triple mutant (terminator 1 plus terminator 2 plus the methylase Shine-Dalgarno region). A higher level of beta-galactosidase synthesis was seen in the triple mutant. Therefore, unlike with previously described attenuators, it can be concluded that both transcriptional and translational attenuation contribute to the regulation of ermK, although transcriptional attenuation plays a larger role.    We cloned and characterized a gene, cotM, that resides in the 173 degrees region of the Bacillus subtilis chromosome and is involved in spore outer coat assembly. We found that expression of the cotM gene is induced during development under sigma K control and is negatively regulated by the GerE transcription factor. Disruption of the cotM gene resulted in spores with an abnormal pattern of coat proteins. Electron microscopy revealed that the outer coat in cotM mutant spores had lost its multilayered type of organization, presenting a diffuse appearance. In particular, significant amounts of material were absent from the outer coat layers, which in some areas had a lamellar structure more typical of the inner coat. Occasionally, a pattern of closely spaced ridges protruding from its surface was observed. No deficiency associated with the inner coat or any other spore structure was found. CotM is related to the alpha-crystallin family of low-molecular-weight heat shock proteins, members of which can be substrates for transglutaminase-mediated protein cross-linking. CotM was not detected among the extractable spore coat proteins. These observations are consistent with a model according to which CotM is part of a cross-linked insoluble skeleton that surrounds the spore, serves as a matrix for the assembly of additional outer coat material, and confers structural stability to the final structure.    The tomato pathogen Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. michiganensis NCPPB382, causing bacterial wilt and canker, harbors two plasmids, pCM1 (27.5 kb) and pCM2 (72 kb), carrying genes involved in virulence. The region of plasmid pCM2 encoding the pathogenicity locus pat-1 was mapped by deletion analysis and complementation studies to a 1.5-kb Bg/II/SmaI DNA fragment. Introduction of the pat-1 region into endophytic, plasmid-free isolates of C. michiganensis subsp. michiganensis converted these bacteria into virulent pathogens. Based on the nucleotide sequence of the pat-1 region, an open reading frame (ORF1) can be predicted, coding for a protein of 280 amino acids and 29.7 kDa with homology to serine proteases. Introduction of a frame-shift mutation in ORF1 leads to a loss of the pathogenic phenotype. Northern (RNA) hybridizations identified an 1.5-knt transcript of the pat-1 structural gene. The site of transcription initiation was mapped by primer extension and a typical -10/-35 region was located with significant homology to the consensus Escherichia coli sigma 70 and Bacillus subtilis sigma 43 promoters. Downstream of the pat-1 structural gene, a peculiar repetitive sequence motif (pat-1rep) is located, consisting of 20 direct tandem repeats preceded by a run of 14 guanosine residues. DNA sequences homologous to pat-1rep were isolated and characterized from four virulent C. michiganensis subsp. michiganensis strains exhibiting a high extent of structural conservation. The deletion of this repetitive sequence reduced virulence significantly but did not lead to a complete loss of the virulence phenotype.    A 120-base phage phi29 encoded RNA (pRNA) has a novel role in DNA packaging. This pRNA possesses five single-base bulges, one three-base bulge, one bifurcation bulge, one bulge loop, and two stem loops. Circularly permuted pRNAs (cpRNA) were constructed to examine the function of these bulges and loops as well as their adjacent sequences. Each of the five single-base bulges was nonessential. The bifurcation bulge could be deleted and replaced with a new opening to provide flexibility for maintaining an overall correct folding in three-way junction. All of these nonessential bulges or their adjacent bases could be used as new termini for cpRNAs. The three-base (C18C19A20) bulge was dispensable for procapsid binding, but was indispensable for DNA packaging. The secondary structure around this CCA bulge and the phylogenetically conserved bases within or around it were investigated. Bases A14C15U16 were confirmed, by compensatory modification, to pair with U103G102A101. A99 was needed only to allow the proper folding of CCA bulge in the appropriate sequence order and distance constraints. Beyond these, the seemingly phylogenetic conservation of other bases has little role in pRNA activity. Each of the three stem loops was essential for procapsid binding, DNA packaging, and phage assembly. Disruption of the middle of any one of the loops resulted in dramatic reductions in procapsid binding, subsequent DNA packaging, and phage assembly activities. However, disruption of the loops at sequences that were close to double-stranded regions of the RNA did not interfere with pRNA activity significantly. Our results suggest that double-stranded helical regions near these loops were most likely not involved in interactions with components of the DNA-packaging machinery. Instead, these regions appear to be merely present to serve as a scaffolding to display the single-stranded loops that are important for pRNA tertiary structure or for interaction with the procapsid or other packaging components.    The 5&apos; region of the lac operon of Lactobacillus casei has been investigated. An open reading frame of 293 codons, designated lacT, was identified upstream of lacE. The gene product encoded by lacT is related to the family of transcriptional antiterminator proteins, which includes BglG from Escherichia coli, ArbG from Erwinia chrysanthemi, SacT, SacY, and LicT from Bacillus subtilis, and BglR from Lactococcus lactis. Amino acid sequence identities range from 35 to 24%, while similarities range from 56 to 47%. The transcriptional start site of the lac operon was identified upstream of lacT. The corresponding mRNA would contain in the 5&apos; region a sequence with high similarity to the consensus RNA binding site of transcriptional antiterminators overlapping a sequence capable of folding into a structure that resembles a rho-independent terminator. LacT was shown to be active as an antiterminator in a B. subtilis test system using the sacB target sequence. lacT directly precedes lacEGF, the genes coding for enzyme IICB, phospho-beta-galactosidase, and enzyme IIA, and these genes are followed by a sequence that appears to encode a second rho-independent transcription terminator-like structure. Northern hybridizations with probes against lacT, lacE, and lacF revealed transcripts of similar sizes for the lac mRNAs of several L. casei strains. Since the length of the lac mRNA is just sufficient to contain lacTEGF, we conclude that the lac operon of L. casei does not contain the genes of the accessory tagatose-6-phosphate pathway as occurs in the lac operons of Lactococcus lactis, Streptococcus mutans, or Staphylococcus aureus.    Subtilin is a lanthionine-containing peptide antibiotic (lantibiotic) produced by Bacillus subtilis. It is ribosomally synthesized as a prepeptide and modified posttranslationally. Three proteins of the subtilin gene cluster (SpaB, SpaC, and SpaT) which are probably involved in prepeptide modification and transport have been identified genetically (C. Klein, C. Kaletta, N. Schnell, and K.-D. Entian, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 58: 132-142, 1992). Immunoblot analysis revealed that production of SpaC is strongly regulated (Z. Gutowski-Eckel, C. Klein, K. Siegers, K. Bohm, M. Hammelmann, and K.-D. Entian, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 60:1-11, 1994). Transcription of the SpaC protein started in the late logarithmic growth phase, reaching a maximum in the early stationary growth phase. No SpaC was detectable in the early logarithmic growth phase. Deletions within the spaR and spaK genes, which act as a two-component regulatory system, resulted in failure to express SpaB and SpaC, indicating that these two genes are the regulatory targets. Western blot analysis of vesicle preparations of B. subtilis revealed that the SpaB, SpaT, and SpaC proteins are membrane bound, although some of the protein was also detectable in cell extracts. By using the yeast two-hybrid analysis system for protein interactions, we showed that a complex of at least two each of SpaT, SpaB, and SpaC is most probably associated with the substrate SpaS. These results were also confirmed by coimmunoprecipitation experiments. In these cosedimentation experiments, SpaB and SpaC were coprecipitated by antisera against SpaC, SpaB, and SpaT, as well as by a monoclonal antibody against epitope-tagged SpaS, indicating that these four proteins are associated.    EsigmaG-dependent transcription of the splAB operon in the forespore at stage III of Bacillus subtilis sporulation initiates from two promoters, P1 preceding splA (major) and P3 preceding splB (minor). To explore the possible role of splA in controlling splB-encoded spore photoproduct lyase expression, we measured beta-galactosidase from splB-lacZ fusions integrated at the SPbeta prophage locus which contained point mutations or deletions which either inactivated or physically removed P1 and/or splA. Paradoxically, inactivation of P1 by point mutation or its removal by deletion from upstream resulted in elevated beta-galactosidase expression of the resulting splB-lacZ fusion, as did an in-frame deletion of splA which left P1 and P3 intact;however, expression of all fusions remained sporulation specific and EsigmaG dependent.    The major cold shock protein of Bacillus subtilis, CspB, has been shown to affect the level of several cold-induced proteins in B. subtilis after cold shock. Here we show that the expression of CspB in Escherichia coli at 37 degrees C - conditions where the cold shock proteins CspA and CspB of E. coli are not present - resulted in a marked decrease in cellular growth rate and had a profound influence on the pattern of protein synthesis, as revealed by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. This involves both decreases and increases in the rates of synthesis of specific proteins. Specifically, CspB induction resulted in enhanced beta-galactosidase activity expressed from a transcriptional hns-lacZ fusion. This increase reflects the induction of hns transcription and H-NS synthesis after cold shock, which has been demonstrated to be dependent on CspA in vitro. In contrast, expression of a mutant form of CspB (CspBF15A) that is unable to bind to ssDNA in vitro had no effect on growth rate, pattern of protein synthesis or beta-galactosidase activity. Our data demonstrate a strong influence of CspB on protein synthesis in E. coli and suggest a similar function for CspA in E. coli to that of CspB in B. subtilis.    The pseudouridine (psi) residues present in the high molecular mass RNA from the large ribosomal subunit (LSU) have been sequenced from representative species of the eukaryotes, prokaryotes and archaebacteria, and from mitochondrial and chloroplast organelles. Ribosomes from Bacillus subtilis, Halobacter halobium, Drosphilia melanogaster, Mus musculus, Homo sapiens, mitochondria of M. musculus, H. sapiens and Trypanosoma brucei, and Zea mays chloroplasts were examined, resulting in the exact localization of 190 psi residues. The number of psi residues per RNA varied from one in the mitochondrial RNAs to 57 in the cytoplasmic LSU RNA of D. melanogaster and M. musculus. Despite this, all of the psi residues were found in three domains, II, IV and V. All three are at or have been linked to the peptidyl transferase center according to the literature. Comparison of the sites for psi among the species examined revealed four conserved or semi-conserved segments. One is the region 1911 to 1917, which contains three psi or modified psi in almost all species examined. This site is also juxtaposed to the decoding site of the 30 S subunit in the 70 S ribosome and has been implicated in the fidelity of codon recognition. Three additional sites were at the peptidyl transferase center itself. The juxtaposition of the conserved sites for psi with the two important functions of the ribosome, codon recognition and peptide bond formation, implies an important role for psi in ribosome function. We report some new putative modified nucleosides in LSU RNAs as detected by reverse transcription, correct a segment of the sequence of Z. mays chloroplasts and D. melanogaster LSU RNA, correlate the secondary structural context for all known psi residues in ribosomal RNA, and compare the sites for psi with those known for methylated nucleosides in H. sapiens.    Fully virulent Bacillus anthracis bacilli are encapsulated and toxinogenic. These bacteria carry two plasmids, pXO1, and pXO2, encoding toxins and capsule synthetic-enzymes (capB, C, A, dep), respectively. The PXO1 plasmid strongly enhances capsule formation. This influence was studied by analysing the expression of a capB-lacZ fusion in various backgrounds. The beta-galactosidase activities were similar in a delta atxA strain and a pXO1 cured strain. Moreover, the capB-lacZ expression level could be restored, in a pXO1 cured strain, by addition of atxA in trans. Thus, we conclude that the pX01 influence on capsule synthesis is mediated by AtxA, the pXO1-encoded trans-activator of the toxin gene expression.    Expression of cryIVA, one of the insecticidal protein genes of B. thuringiensis subsp. israelensis, is regulated at the transcriptional level. The cryIVA gene is specifically transcribed during the stationary phase of this bacterium. As shown in our previous report [Yoshisue et al. (1993a)], the transcription from the -364 position of the cryIVA gene is conducted by the major promoter P1 that is functional during middle stages of the stationary phase of B. thuringiensis. In the present study, we have identified a second transcriptional start point P2 for the cryIVA gene in addition to P1, the major transcriptional start point. The transcription from P2 of the cryIVA gene occurred later than that from P1, during later stages of stationary phase of B. thuringiensis subsp. israelensis. The -10 and -35 nt sequences upstream from P2 of cryIVA are similar to those of the omega 28-specific promoters of B. thuringiensis genes and of the omega K-specific promoters of B. subtilis genes. It is most likely that the region upstream from P2 of cryIVA contains the nt sequences that determine the omega 28-specific promoter, the second one, for the cryIVA gene.    In the human pathogen Staphylococcus aureus, many proteins involved in the infection process are preferentially produced during the stationary growth phase. Using a DNA probe corresponding to the Bacillus subtilis gene encoding the stationary-phase sigma factor SigB (sigmaB), we identified a gene in S. aureus with similarity to B. subtilis sigB. The sigB region was mapped on the SmaI I fragment of the S. aureus chromosome and contains a total of six open reading frames (orf1-6). The deduced amino acid sequences of orf2, orf3, orf4, and orf5 show 64, 67, 71, and 77% similarity to the B. subtilis proteins RsbU, RsbV, RsbW, and SigB, respectively, with SigB representing the sigma factor and the Rsb proteins representing regulators of sigma B. Furthermore, the relative position of the corresponding genes is conserved in B. subtilis, which strongly suggests that we identified the sigB operon of S. aureus, encoding an alternative sigma factor in this organism. The proposed gene products of the two remaining open reading frames show 48-62% similarity to the PemK, ChpAK, and ChpBK growth inhibitors of Escherichia coli (ORF1) and 61% similarity to the ribosomal protein S1 of Haemophilus influenzae (ORF6). Northern blot analysis of the sigB region in S. aureus revealed that four different transcripts are expressed under different conditions of growth phase and stress. These results indicate a complex transcriptional regulation that differs between S. aureus and B. subtilis.    Antitermination of transcription mediated by proteins interacting with mRNA sequences is described for nine operons/regulons. Eight of the systems are catabolic, while the ninth, the Klebsiella pneumoniae nas regulon, is involved in the assimilation of nitrate and nitrite. Six of the catabolic operons/regulons are found in Bacillus subtilis, one is found in Escherichia coli, and one in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The antitermination system of five of the operons/regulons (E. coli blg, and sacPA, sacB, bgl, and lic from B. subtilis) are assigned to the bgl-sac family on the basis of extensive similarities with regard to antiterminator proteins and the sequences of the antiterminators. Other members of the bgl-sac family are the arb operon of Erwinia chrysanthemi and a presumed bgl operon of Lactococcus lactis. The antitermination systems of the other four operons/regulons (B. subtilis glp, B. subtilis hut, P. aeruginosa ami, and K. pneumoniae nas) seem to be unrelated both to the bgl-sac family and to each other. The antiterminator protein of the B. subtilis glp regulon has been found not only to cause antitermination but also to stabilize the resultant mRNA and to mediate glucose repression. If other antiterminator proteins, and antitermination factors, also prove to have additional functions, it will broaden the impact of antitermination as a means of controlling gene expression.    The sapB locus was defined by mutations that render sporulation alkaline phosphatase formation independent of sigma F and sigma E without affecting the temporal control of formation. The sapB locus has been cloned and sequenced. The deduced polypeptide is 232 amino acids long, with a molecular mass of 26 kDa. It is very similar to four sequences in the database, none of which has a known function. Analysis of the transcription of sapB indicates that it is induced during late exponential phase, and that maximum expression is reached during the first hour of stationary phase, both under sporulation and non-sporulation conditions. The defining mutations of the locus, sapB2 and sapB10, have been sequenced and found to contain the same change, a G--&gt;A transition resulting in an Ala111 Thr switch. This mutation apparently results in a gain-of-function, as sapB null mutants are indistinguishable from sap+ strains in terms of their APase production during sporulation.    The L-carbamoylase gene (amaB) upstream of the previously detected L-aminoacylase gene (amaA) in the Bacillus stearothermophilus NCIB8224 strain was identified in this study. The amaB and amaA genes are cotranscribed as a single mRNA from the same transcriptional start. The two-ama-gene operon is conserved in B. stearothermophilus strains. A cross-activity of L-carbamoylase towards respective substrates for L-aminoacylase supports the hypothesis of a common ancestor for both amino acid amidohydrolase genes.    We report the existence of a small open reading frame (usd) that is located between the promoter and coding sequence for the sporulation gene spoIIID in Bacillus subtilis. The mRNA from the usd-spoIIID operon contains an inverted repeat sequence that is predicted to form a stem-loop structure that would sequester the ribosome binding site for spoIIID. A mutation eliminating the ribosome binding site for the upstream open reading frame caused an oligosporogenous phenotype and interfered with the translation, but not the transcription, of the downstream gene spoIIID. We propose that efficient synthesis of SpoIIID requires that the putative stem-loop structure be disrupted by translation through the upstream open reading frame.    In 1992, we described the cloning and sequencing of the dnaK locus of Bacillus subtilis which, together with transcriptional studies, implied a tetracistronic structure of the operon consisting of the genes hrcA, grpE, dnaK, and dnaJ. We have repeated the Northern blot analysis, this time using riboprobes instead of oligonucleotides, and have detected a heat-inducible 8-kb transcript, suggesting the existence of additional heat shock genes downstream of dnaJ. Cloning and sequencing of that region revealed the existence of three novel heat shock genes named orf35, orf28, and orf50, extending the tetra- into a heptacistronic operon. This is now the largest dnaK operon to be described to date. The three new genes are transcribed as a part of the entire dnaK operon (8.0-kb heptacistronic heat-inducible transcript) and as part of a suboperon starting at an internal vegetative promoter immediately upstream of dnaJ (4.3-kb tetracistronic non-heat-inducible transcript). In addition, the Northern blot analysis detected several processing products of these two primary transcripts. To demonstrate the existence of the internal promoter, a DNA fragment containing this putative promoter structure was inserted upstream of a promoterless bgaB gene, resulting in the synthesis of beta-galactosidase. Challenging this transcriptional fusion with various stress factors did not result in the activation of this promoter. To assign a biological function to the three novel genes, they have each been inactivated by the insertion of a cat cassette. All of the mutants were viable, and furthermore, these genes are (i) not essential for growth at high temperatures, (ii) not involved in the regulation of the heat shock response, and (iii) sporulation proficient. Blocking transcription of the suboperon from the upstream heat-inducible promoter did not impair growth and viability at high temperatures.    A mutation (gltR24) that allows Bacillus subtilis glutamate synthase (gltAB) gene expression in the absence of its positive regulator, GltC, was identified. Cloning and sequencing of the gltR gene revealed that the putative gltR product belongs to the LysR family of transcriptional regulators and is thus related to GltC. A null mutation in gltR had no effect on gltAB expression under any environmental condition tested, suggesting that gltR24 is a gain-of-function mutation. GltR24-dependent transcription of gltAB, initiated at the same base pair as GltC-dependent transcription, was responsive to the nitrogen source in the medium and required the integrity of sequences upstream of the gltAB promoter that are also necessary for GltC-dependent expression. Expression of the gltC gene, transcribed divergently from gltA from an overlapping promoter, was not affected by GltR. Both wild-type GltR and GltR24 negatively regulated their own expression. The gltR gene was mapped to 233 degrees on the B. subtilis chromosome, very close to the azlB locus.    Random Tn917 mutagenesis of Bacillus subtilis followed by selection of lipoic acid auxotrophs led to the isolation of the cysH gene. The gene was sequenced and found to encode a phosphoadenylylsulfate sulfotransferase with a molecular mass of 27 kDa. Expression of lacZ fused to the cysH promoter was repressed by cysteine and sulfide and induced by sulfur limitation, indicating that cysH is controlled at the level of transcription.    The Bacillus subtilis spoVD gene encodes a penicillin-binding protein required for spore morphogenesis. SpoIIID is a sequence-specific DNA-binding protein that activates or represses the transcription of many different genes. We have defined the spoVD promoter region and demonstrated that it is recognized by sigmaE RNA polymerase in vitro and that SpoIIID represses spoVD transcription. Two strong SpoIIID-binding sites were mapped in the spoVD promoter region, one overlapping the -35 region and the other encompassing the -10 region and the transcriptional start site.    We present the initial genetic and biochemical characterization of the propionate (prp) locus at 8.5 centisomes of the Salmonella typhimurium LT2 chromosome (T. A. Hammelman et al., FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 137: 233-239, 1996). In this paper, we report the nucleotide sequences of two divergently transcribed transcriptional units. One unit is comprised of the prpR gene (1,626 bp) encoding a member of the sigma-54 family of transcriptional activators; the second unit contains an operon of four genes designated prpB (888 bp), prpC (1,170 bp), prpD (1,452 bp), and prpE (1,923 bp). The heme biosynthetic gene hemB was shown by DNA sequencing to be located immediately downstream of the prpBCDE operon; hemB is divergently transcribed from prpBCDE and is separated from prpE by a 66-bp gap. In addition, we demonstrate the involvement of PrpB, PrpC, and PrpD in propionate catabolism by complementation analysis of mutants using plasmids carrying a single prp gene under the control of the arabinose-responsive P(BAD) promoter. Expression of prpB to high levels was deleterious to the growth of a prp+ strain on minimal medium supplemented with propionate as a carbon and energy source. We also report the cloning and overexpression of prpB, prpC, prpD, and prpE in the T7 system. PrpB, PrpC, PrpD, and PrpE had molecular masses of ca. 32, ca. 44, ca. 53, and ca. 70 kDa, respectively. PrpB showed homology to carboxyphosphonoenolpyruvate phosphonomutase of Streptomyces hygroscopicus and to its homolog in the carnation Dianthus caryophyllus; PrpC was homologous to both archaeal and bacterial citrate synthases; PrpD showed homology to yeast and Bacillus subtilis proteins of unknown function; PrpE showed homology to acetyl coenzyme A synthetases. We identified a sigma-54 (RpoN)-dependent promoter with a consensus RpoN binding site upstream of the initiating methionine codon of prpB, the promoter-proximal gene of the prp operon. Consistent with this finding, an rpoN prp+ mutant failed to use propionate as carbon and energy source. Finally, we report the location of MudI1734 elements inserted in prpC or prpD and of a Tn10delta16delta17 element in prpB and provide genetic evidence supporting the conclusion that the prpBCDE genes constitute an operon.    Recombination studies of bacteria are often carried out with multicopy plasmids, and recombination frequencies are often deduced from the proportion of cells in the population that express a recombinant phenotype. These frequencies should however be called apparent frequencies, since detection of the recombinant cells requires not only the formation of a rearranged plasmid but also its establishment in the cell. The establishment of the recombinant plasmid can possibly be affected by its interaction with the parental plasmids. To test this hypothesis, we have used a plasmid system enabling the study of deletion formation between short direct repeats (18 bp) in Bacillus subtilis and developed a method by which deletion frequencies are measured under conditions under which interaction is abolished. Real deletion frequencies were thus determined and compared with apparent deletion frequencies. Real frequencies were underestimated by a factor ranging from 4- to 500-fold, depending upon the plasmid under study. This implies that a large majority of the recombinant molecules that are formed are generally not detected. We show that apparent deletion frequencies strongly depend upon (i) the parental plasmid copy number, (ii) the ability of the recombinant molecules to form heterodimeric plasmids, and (iii) the fitness of the recombinant molecules relative to that of parental molecules. Finally, we show that under conditions under which all recombinant molecules are scored, transcription can inhibit the deletion process 10-fold.    RNA polymerase II contains a ribonuclease activity which is stimulated by the transcription elongation factor SII. This nuclease shortens the nascent RNA and facilitates relief of transcriptional arrest by allowing the enzyme to make multiple attempts to read through an obstacle to transcription. The catalytic center of this ribonuclease is unknown, although a region of the enzyme&apos;s second largest subunit shares local sequence similarly with barnase and other bacterial ribonucleases. To test the role of the barnase homology region in SII-activated cleavage, we engineered a single amino acid change in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae enzyme at a position homologous to a catalytic residue of barnase (Glu-371) and has been suggested as a participant in active site chemistry of RNA polymerase II. We purified RNA polymerase II from mutant yeast and assayed its ability to cleave and re-extend the nascent RNA following SII treatment. We find no defects in this function of the mutant enzyme, suggesting that the barnase homology region does not represent the active site of the SII-activated nuclease. These mutant yeast cells were also resistant to mycophenolic acid, which slows the growth of some yeast mutants bearing elongation defective RNA polymerase II or mutant elongation factor SII.    We describe a large bacterial locus that, unusually, encodes components typically required for both the non-ribosomal synthesis of peptides and also polyketide/fatty acid synthase function. Two tandem ABC transporter genes in this putative nrp (non-ribosomal peptide/polyketide) operon suggest that the principal product may be secreted. Immediately distal to the nrp operon is a gene, irpP, encoding a small peptide similar to the Bacillus ComX pheromone that in its mature, extracellular form increases expression of unlinked non-ribosomal peptide synthesis genes. Transcription of both the nrp operon and irpP was up-regulated in iron-limiting culture conditions, consistent with the presence of a putative Fur repressor-binding site 5&apos; of irpP. The locus was isolated from Proteus mirabilis as the site of a TnphoA insertion causing impaired swarm cell differentiation and an aberrant swarming pattern. The mutation was in one of the transporter genes, but a comparable swarming defect resulted from interposon disruption of the putative nrp synthetase gene.    The B. subtilis bacteriophage SPP1 terminase, encoded by genes 1 and 2, is required for the initiation of headful packaging. The DNA segment to which gene 1 product (G/P) binds includes the pacL and pacR sites and the late PL1 and PL2 promoters from which genes 1 to 7 are transcribed. When SPP1wt or SPP1sus115 (gene 6-) phages were used to infect a B. subtilis sup0 strain, the gene 1 to 7 mRNA synthesis was reduced at late times of infection. This was not observed, however, when either chloramphenicol was added 7 min after infection with SPP1wt or when SPP1sus114 (gene 1-) or SPP1sus19 (gene 2-) were used to infect B. subtilis sup0 cells. These results suggest that the terminase enzyme functions as a repressor of its own transcription. G/P and B. subtilis RNA polymerase (RP) bind to the pacL segment, which contains the PL1 and PL2 promoter region. The binding of G/P to the pacL site does not seem to exclude RP from the promoters, despite of the overlapping of their binding sites. It is likely that the terminase protein does not repress transcription by a mere steric hindrance of RP binding.    Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) mycobacteria have been used as adjuvant in the active immunotherapy of various human cancers. In addition, dendritic cells, which are the most potent antigen-presenting cells, have been shown to be capable of initiating anti-tumor immune responses. Here we investigated the effects of BCG on dendritic cells cultured from human blood. Addition of BCG resulted in rapid homotypic adhesion of dendritic cells. Moreover, BCG concentrations ranging from 10(4) to 10(6) bacteria/ml enhanced expression of the dendritic-cell-maturation antigen CD83 and of the T-cell co-stimulator CD86 (B7-2) in a dose-dependent manner. Concomitant with the increase of CD83 and CD86 expression, the cells lost the ability to capture soluble antigens, as determined by the exclusion of fluoresceinated Dextran molecules. Strikingly, the same dosages of BCG-bacteria stimulated TNF-alpha-gene transcription and TNF-alpha-protein release from dendritic cells in a dose-dependent fashion. BCG infection of dendritic cells in the presence of a neutralizing antibody directed against TNF-alpha inhibited CD83 expression by more than 50% indicating that the BCG-induced maturation of dendritic cells was at least partially mediated by dendritic-cell-derived TNF-alpha. The finding that BCG activates the most potent antigen-presenting cells reveals a plausible immunological mechanism of the occasionally observed anti-tumor activity of BCG.    A new locus, csgA, has been identified in a search for developmental genes transcribed by E sigmaG in Bacillus subtilis. csgA has the potential to encode three small proteins, CsgAA, CsgAB and CsgAC. The latter two would be encoded by overlapping ORFs. csgA is expressed in the spore chamber of the differentiating cell and is under the control of sigmaG and the transcriptional regulatory protein SpoVT. Mutation of csgA did not affect spore formation but produced a subtle defect in the ability of the germinating spore to resume vegetative growth.    The complete sequence of a Bacillus cereus member of the SNF2 family of putative helicases showed conservation of all seven motifs typical of this family. Bcsnf predicted a protein of 1064 aa where the conserved SNF2 domain was located at the carboxy terminus, whereas the 633 amino-terminal aa showed no homology to any protein in the databases. A putative transcriptional start was identified by primer extension, indicating that Bcsnf is not a part of a larger operon. No phenotypical changes were observed after insertional inactivation of Bcsnf. The completely sequenced genomes of Mycoplasma genitalium and Haemophilus influenzae contain one ORF each with similarity to the SNF2 family: MG018 and HI0616, respectively. A phylogenetic tree of the SNF2 family showed that BcSNF and MG018 were most closely related, and appeared closer to the eukaryotic members of the SNF2 family than to the two other bacterial members of the family, HepA from Escherichia coli and HI0616.    A mutation, bofC1, that restores sigma K activation in Bacillus subtilis strains unable to produce active sigma G has been identified. This mutation defines a new sporulation gene, bofC, that has been cloned and sequenced and encodes a 19 kDa protein. bofC is transcribed in the forespore by RNA polymerase associated with the transcription factors sigma F (E sigma F) and sigma G (E sigma G). BofC acts negatively on SpoIVB and the results described suggest that BofC regulates SpoIVB activity and its intercompartmental signalling role in the sigma K checkpoint.    hspR is the distal gene of the Streptomyces albus dnaK operon. It encodes a protein similar to GlnR, the repressor of the Bacillus subtilis glutamine synthetase gene. Transcriptional analysis showed that disruption of hspR led to constitutive high-level expression of the dnaK operon, SDS-PAGE analysis revealed over-production and accumulation of the chaperone DnaK at low temperature HSP94, a heat-inducible protein cross-reacting with anti-CipB antibodies, was also shown to be constitutively overexpressed at low temperature in the hspR mutant. Those features were lost when the mutant was complemented in trans by an intact copy of hspR. The hspR mutant was impaired in its growth on solid rich medium: colonies grow slowly at 30 degrees C. However, formation of aerial mycelium and sporulation was not prevented. In liquid culture growth curves of the mutant and the wild type were similar. The kinetics of groEL gene induction were not modified by the hspR null mutation, indicating that HspR was not directly involved in the control of groEL transcription. Thus, in contrast with B. subtilis and other Gram-positive bacteria, transcription of Streptomyces dnaK and groEL operons is not controlled by the same regulator.    Bacillus subtilis SpoIIE is a Ser protein phosphatase whose action on the phosphoprotein SpoIIAA triggers the cell type-specific activation of a sporulation transcription factor. Here we report that SpoIIE displays sequence similarity to the PP2C family of eukaryotic Ser/Thr protein phosphatases, and that residues common to these proteins are required for the function of both SpoIIE and TPD1, a yeast PP2C. These findings suggest that SpoIIE and the PP2C protein phosphatases are structurally related, and reveal a striking formal similarity between the SpoIIAA regulatory circuit and that of mammalian mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase. This similarity may reflect an evolutionarily conserved mechanism of biological regulation based on the interplay of His protein kinase-like Ser kinases and PP2C-like protein phosphatases.    Development of genetic competence in Bacillus subtilis is controlled by the competence-specific transcription factor ComK. ComK activates transcription of itself and several other genes required for competence. The activity of ComK is controlled by other genes including mecA, clpC, and comS. We have used purified ComK, MecA, ClpC, and synthetic ComS to study their interactions and have demonstrated the following mechanism for ComK regulation. ClpC, in the presence of ATP, forms a ternary complex with MecA and ComK, which prevents ComK from binding to its specific DNA target. This complex dissociates when ComS is added, liberating active ComK. ClpC and MecA function as a molecular switch, in which MecA confers molecular recognition, connecting ClpC to ComK and to ComS.    A Bacillus subtilis secA mutant, secA12, which is blocked at an early stage of sporulation, is able to grow as well as the wild-type strain at all temperatures tested. Experiments with lacZ fusion genes showed that the induction of kinA expression, as well as the sporulation-specific transcription of the spo0A gene, was not observed in the secA12 mutant. However, transcription of the spo0H gene (coding for sigmaH, which is required for the transcription of kinA and spo0A) and accumulation of the sigmaH protein were not affected in secA12. These results suggested that mutations in secA affect a factor required for efficient transcription of kinA as well as for the activation of the phosphorelay pathway.    The transition state regulator AbrB functions as an activator, a repressor, and a preventer of gene expression in Bacillus subtilis. In this paper, we show that expression of abrB is growth phase dependent. Accumulation of abrB transcript is restricted to a short period spanning the transition between the lag and exponential phases of the growth cycle. The level of abrB transcript then falls sharply, and transcript cannot be detected at the mid-exponential period of the growth cycle. The level of AbrB protein is also maximal during early exponential growth but decreases gradually throughout the remainder of the growth cycle. The abrupt reduction of abrB transcript level during the early period of the growth cycle is effected by the phosphorylated form of the response regulator Spo0p3and to a lesser extent by negative autoregulation. The growth cycle-dependent expression of abrB is very similar to that observed for fis in Escherichia coli and in Salmonella typhimurium. Although AbrB and Fis are not homologous proteins, they display extensive similarity in terms of size, DNA binding characteristics, growth cycle-dependent patterns of expression, and their control over the expression of a varied group of operons. We hypothesize therefore that AbrB, like Fis, is a nucleoid binding protein.    A new catabolic system in Bacillus subtilis involved in utilization of beta-glucosidic compounds has been investigated. It consists of five genes encoding phosphotransferase system (PTS) enzyme II (licB and licC) and enzyme IIA (licA), a presumed 6-phospho-beta-glucosidase (licH), as well as a putative regulator protein (licR). The genes map around 334 degrees of the B. subtilis chromosome, and their products are involved in the uptake and utilization of lichenan degradation products. These five genes are organized in two transcriptional units. A weak promoter precedes gene licR, and transcription is obviously terminated at a secondary structure immediately downstream of the reading frame, as shown by Northern RNA blot analysis. Genes licB, licC, licA, and licH constitute an operon. Initiation of transcription at the promoter in front of this operon presumably requires activation by the gene product of licR. The LicR protein shows an unusual domain structure, i.e., similarities to (i) the conserved transcriptional antiterminator BgIG family signature and (ii) PTS enzyme II. Using RNA techniques and transcriptional lacZ fusions, we have shown that the expression of the licBCAH operon is inducible by products of lichenan hydrolysis, lichenan and cellobiose. The presence of excess glucose prevents the induction of this operon, indicating the control by carbon catabolite repression. Moreover, the expression of the operon requires the general PTS components and seems to be negatively controlled by the specific lic PTS enzymes.    We report on the characterization of three new transcription units expressed during sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. Two of the units, cse15 and cse60, were mapped at about 123 degrees and 62 degrees on the genetic map, respectively. Their transcription commenced around h 2 of sporulation and showed an absolute requirement for sigmaE. Maximal expression of both cse15 and cse60 further depended on the DNA-binding protein SpoIIID. Primer extension results revealed -10 and -35 sequences upstream of the cse15 and cse60 coding sequences very similar to those utilized by sigmaE-containing RNA polymerase. Alignment of these and other regulatory regions led to a revised consensus sequence for sigmaE-dependent promoters. A third transcriptional unit, designated csk22, was localized at approximately 173 degrees on the chromosome. Transcription of csk22 was activated at h 4 of sporulation, required the late mother-cell regulator sigmaK, and was repressed by the GerE protein. Sequences in the csk22 promoter region were similar to those of other sigmaK-dependent promoters. The cse60 locus was deduced to encode an acidic product of only 60 residues. A 37.6-kDa protein apparently encoded by cse15 was weakly related to the heavy chain of myosins, as well as to other myosin-like proteins, and is predicted to contain a central, 100 residue-long coiled-coil domain. Finally, csk22 is inferred to encode a 18.2-kDa hydrophobic product with five possible membrane-spanning helices, which could function as a transporter.    To study the role of the cis-acting element(s) in controlling the expression of the cytochrome P450(BM-1) gene and its upstream regulatory gene, bm1P1, in Bacillus megaterium, various deletion derivatives were constructed. A 53-bp inverted repeat located midway between the P450(BM-1) gene and bm1P1 gene was found in vivo to negatively regulate the expression of both genes, the regulation of which may occur at the transcriptional level. The promoter of the P450(BM-1), gene was also identified and found to be similar to those recognized by the sigmaA RNA polymerase of Bacillus subtilis. Possible mechanisms by which the 53-bp inverted repeat regulates the gene expression are discussed.    The Bacillus subtilis dinR gene encodes a 23-kDa protein that shares about 34% homology with the Escherichia coli LexA protein. We have purified the dinR gene product to near homogeneity, and we describe its activities. The purified DinR protein binds specifically to the promoter regions of three B. subtilis SOS genes: dinB, dinC, and recA. Electrophoretic mobility of DinR-promoter complexes in each case is identical to that of promoters bound by the B. subtilis SOS repressor (Lovett, et al., (1993) J. Bacteriol. 175, 6842-6849). Analysis of hydroxyl radical footprints of DinR bound to the dinC promoter indicates that DinR interacts with one side of the DNA providing access to the consensus operator site (5&apos;-GAACN4GTTC-3&apos;) within two adjacent major grooves. Consistent with its proposed role as a transcriptional repressor, purified DinR displaces B. subtilis RNA polymerase from the recA promoter and represses transcription of the recA gene in vitro. We also show that purified DinR protein undergoes general base-catalyzed autodigestion as well as RecA-mediated cleavage at the peptide bond between Ala-91 and Gly-92. Corresponding to its cleavage by activated RecA following DNA damage, the level of DinR is significantly reduced in RecA+ B. subtilis cells following exposure to mitomycin C. Thus, the DinR protein is structurally and functionally analogous to the E. coli LexA protein, and accordingly, we propose renaming the protein B. subtilis LexA.    A GTPase gene adjacent to the Ca(2+)-ATPase gene from Synechocystis PCC 6803 has been sequenced. It encodes for a protein of 456 amino acids revealing high homology to so-called 50K proteins of Bacillus subtilis and Pseudomonas putida. Cotranscription of GTPase and Ca(2+)-ATPase genes has been shown by reverse transcription PCR.    The Bacillus subtilis pyr operon is regulated by exogenous pyrimidines by a transcriptional attenuation mechanism. Transcription in vitro from pyr DNA templates specifying attenuation regions yielded terminated and read-through transcripts of the expected lengths. Addition of the PyrR regulatory protein plus UMP led to greatly increased termination. Synthetic antisense deoxyoligonucleotides were used to probe possible secondary structures in the pyr mRNA that were proposed to play roles in controlling attenuation. Oligonucleotides predicted to disrupt terminator structures suppressed termination, whereas oligonucleotides predicted to disrupt the stem of antiterminator stem-loops strongly promoted termination at the usual termination site. Oligonucleotides that disrupt a previously unrecognized stem-loop structure, called the anti-antiterminator, the formation of which interferes with formation of the downstream antiterminator, suppressed termination. We propose that transcriptional attenuation of the pyr operon is governed by switching between alternative antiterminator versus anti-antiterminator plus terminator structures, and that PyrR acts by UMP-dependent binding to and stabilization of the anti-antiterminator.    Here, we report on the construction of three integrative plasmids for Bacillus subtilis (Bs) allowing in vitro construction of transcriptional fusions. These plasmids contain a neomycin- or tetracycline-resistance cassette and one of three promoterless genes: bgaB (encoding beta-galactosidase), cat (chloramphenicol acetyltransferase), or xylE (catechol 2,3-dioxygenase). All cassettes are flanked by the 3&apos;- and 5&apos;-ends of the amyE gene (encoding alpha-amylase) allowing integration of these cassettes at the amyE locus of the Bs chromosome. For propagation and selection in Escherichia coli, the plasmids contain the pBR322 origin of DNA replication and the beta-lactamase-encoding bla gene. Four unique restriction sites can be used for insertion of restriction fragments carrying promoter fragments. All three reporter genes express heat-stable enzymes (stable up to at least 50 degrees C for 30 min) as shown here. We would like to point to the modular nature of these plasmids where the three reporter genes and the two resistance cassettes can be combined in any permutation. The versatility of the promoter-probe vectors was demonstrated by the integration of the promoters of the dnaK and groE operons of Bs and following their heat-inducible expression.    Sporulation in Bacillus subtilis is a simple developmental system involving the differentiation of two cell types called the prespore and the mother cell. The process is induced by nutrient deprivation and culminates with the formation of a mature spore, which is released by lysis of the mother cell. We have studied commitment to sporulation with several different assays. The results indicate that commitment occurs soon after the formation of the asymmetrically positioned division septum that separates the prespore and the mother cell. This is earlier than the previously postulated point of commitment, prespore engulfment by the mother cell. Commitment coincides approximately with activation of the early prespore- and mother-cell-specific sigma factors, sigma(E) and sigma(F).    The expression of the Bacillus subtilis spoIVB gene, which encodes a developmental cell-cell signalling molecule, has been characterized. In some conditions, this gene can be transcribed by RNA polymerase associated with either sigma F or sigma G, in contrast to previous studies implying exclusive control by sigma G. However, during sporulation, only sigma G directs significant levels of spoIVB expression.    Transcriptional attenuation of the pyrimidine biosynthetic (pyr) operon from Bacillus subtilis was reconstituted with an in vitro system that consisted of pyr DNA templates, B. subtilis RNA polymerase, four ribonucleoside triphosphates, and the purified B. subtilis PyrR regulatory protein. The templates used each specified one of the three known attenuation regions of the pyr operon. Runoff (read-though) and terminated transcripts of the predicted lengths were the only major products synthesized. Transcription of the template that specifies the 5&apos; leader attenuation region of the operon was examined in detail. Termination of transcription at the attenuator was strongly promoted by the combination of PyrR plus UMP. The concentration of UMP required for half-maximal effect was 2.5 microM. UTP also promoted termination in the presence of PyrR, but concentrations 10-fold higher than UMP were required; UDP was only effective at 100 times the concentration of UMP. Other pyrimidine and purine metabolites tested did not affect termination. PRPP, which like UMP is a substrate for the uracil phosphoribosyltransferase activity of PyrR, antagonized UMP-dependent transcriptional termination, but uracil did not. Transcriptional attenuation by PyrR plus UMP was also demonstrated in vitro with templates from the other two pyr attenuation regions. The results strongly support the model for transcriptional regulation of the B. subtilis pyr operon previously proposed by R. J. Turner, Y. Lu, and R. L. Switzer (J. Bacteriol. 176:3708-3722, 1994).    The transcriptional organization and regulation of the dnaK and groE heat shock operons of Chlamydia trachomatis were studied and found to resemble those of the cognate operons of Bacillus subtilis and Clostridium acetobutylicum. The gene order is conserved (hrcA-grpE-dnaK), but no dnaJ homolog could be identified in this region. The dnaK operon was transcribed as a low-abundance polycistronic mRNA whose levels did not increase upon exposure to heat shock. In contrast, a more abundant 2.3-kb mRNA encoding only the dnaK sequence was detectable, and its steady-state level increased upon heat shock. The transcription initiation sites of the dnaK and groE operons were found to be preceded by sequences that resemble an Escherichia coli sigma70 consensus promoter. Upstream of each putative promoter is an inverted repeat sequence which resembles a similar element (CIRCE [controlling inverted repeat of chaperone expression]) found upstream of the dnaK and groE operons in at least 27 eubacterial species. In vitro transcription studies utilizing partially purified C. trachomatis RNA polymerase demonstrated that the regions containing the putative promoter elements of the dnaK and groE operons are functional, although heat shock-regulated expression could not be demonstrated.    Fully virulent Bacillus anthracis bacilli are encapsulated and toxinogenic. These bacteria contain two plasmids, pXO1 and pXO2, carrying genes coding for toxins (pag, lef, and cya) and for capsule synthetic enzymes (capB, capC, capA, and dep), respectively. A transcriptional fusion between the capB regulatory region and the lacZ reporter gene was constructed to study the regulation of capsule synthesis. A single copy of this fusion was inserted into the cap region of pXO2. The influence of environmental factors on the capB-lacZ fusion expression was initially analyzed in a pXO1-negative background: bicarbonate but not temperature induced the transcription from the capB promoter. A strain carrying the recombinant pXO2 and (delta)pag pXO1 was constructed for transregulatory studies. The pXO1 plasmid strongly enhanced capsule formation without modifying the bicarbonate-dependent induction level. A (delta)cap pXO2 was transduced into a strain containing pXO1 harboring a pag-lacZ transcriptional fusion (19). pXO2 showed no influence on the toxin gene transcription.    The nucleotide sequence of a 9444-bp segment around the 78 degrees region of the Bacillus subtilis (Bs) chromosome has been determined. Nine putative orfs were identified. The deduced amino acid sequences of the products of two of them (yfiJ and yfiK) exhibit high similarity to those of a sensor protein, DegS, and a transcriptional regulatory protein, DegU, of Bs, respectively. Three of them (yfiL, yfiM and yfiN) seem to be ABC transporter genes. One orf (designated as lipB), the closest to the sspE among the nine orfs, is the second lipase gene in Bs.    The nucleotide sequence of clpX, which is localized between the tig (trigger factor) and the lon (ATP-dependent protease) genes at 245 degrees on the standard Bacillus subtilis (Bs) genetic map, was determined. The putative clpX gene codes for a 46-kDa protein of 421 amino acid (aa) residues. A comparison of the deduced aa sequence with those of the recently described bacterial clpX gene products from Synechocystis sp., Escherichia coli (Ec), Haemophilus influenzae and Azotobacter vinelandii revealed strong similarities. However, in contrast to Ec, clpX and clpP of Bs are located at different loci on the chromosome and are transcribed as monocistronic genes. A heat-inducible sigma A-like promoter was mapped upstream of the clpX structural gene, but no CIRCE element, characteristic of class-I heat-shock genes (e.g., groESL and dnaK), was found between the transcriptional and translational start sites. Although the majority of the heat-inducible general stress genes in Bs are under the control of the alternative sigma factor, sigma B, the heat induction of clpX appears to be sigma B-independent. The latter indicates that clpX belongs to class-III heat-inducible genes.    Bacillus subtilis ComK plays a critical role in competence development. We report that B. subtilis degR, a positive regulator for exoenzyme production, is negatively regulated by overproduced ComK caused by a mecA null mutation. To identify a positive regulator for comK expression in the mecA background, mutations that allowed the degR gene to be expressed were screened in Tn10 transposon insertion mutants. As a result, we identified degU insertion mutations as those having such a property. The degU mutation reduced comK-lacZ expression in a competence medium in both the wild-type and mecA cells in sporulation and competence media. These results indicate that the degU gene product acts as a positive regulator for comK expression even under the condition where the negative regulation of comK by MecA is released.    Within the framework of an international project for the sequencing of the entire Bacillus subtilis genome, this paper communicates the sequencing of a chromosome region containing the lic and cel loci (65 kb), which creates a 177 kb contig covering the region from gnt to sacXY. This 65 kb region contains 64 ORFs (62 complete and two partial genes). The 14th, 15th and 17th genes correspond to licT, licS and katE, encoding the antiterminator for licS transcription, beta-glucanase (lichenase) and catalase 2, respectively. The 11th, 30th, 36th, 39th, 41st, 45th-48th, 51st and 58th genes are designated deaD, pepT, galE, aldY, msmX, cydABCD, sigY and katX because their products probably encode ATP-dependent RNA helicase, tripeptidase, UDP-glucose 4-epimerase, aldehyde dehydrogenase, multiple sugar-binding transport ATP-binding protein, the respective components of cytochrome d ubiquinol oxidase and ATP-binding cassette transporter, sigma-factor of RNA polymerase and catalase, respectively. The 60th-64th genes are celRABCD, which are probably involved in cellobiose utilization. Gene organization and gene features in the gnt-sacXY region are discussed.    A sequence strategy which combines a low redundancy shotgun approach and directed sequencing has been elaborated. Essentially, the sequences, as well as the size of the fragments utilized for a low coverage shotgun approach, were exploited for the construction of a physical map of the region to be sequenced. The latter considerably simplified the subsequent directed sequencing steps. We report the physical mapping of a 115 kb segment which covers nearly 100 kb of the hisA-cysB region of the Bacillus subtilis chromosome and contains previously sequenced genes sigL and sacB. Sequencing and analysis of a 21305 bp segment, which includes the sigL locus, revealed 21 ORFs, apparently belonging to at least seven transcription units. This segment has a G + C content greater than 47%, compared to 43% characteristic of the flanking regions, and mainly consists of genes whose products seem to be involved in the synthesis of an exopolysaccharide. These observations leave open the possibility that the analysed fragment has been acquired through horizontal transfer.    Within the framework of the international programme to sequence the genome of Bacillus subtilis strain 168, we were allocated the region between dnaB (256 degrees) and pheA (240 degrees). The sequencing of this region is now complete and we report our primary analysis of the 114 kb region containing 114 ORFs. In addition to previously characterized genes, we have identified genes involved in the utilization of plant cell wall polysaccharides, stress responses and the metabolism of amino acids, cell walls, DNA and fatty acids. We also discuss various structural and physical features, including the orientation of genes with respect to replication, putative start and stop codons, ribosome binding sites and rho-independent transcription terminators.    The 49630 bp spo0H-rrnH region of the Bacillus subtilis genome has been fully sequenced. The sequence contains one partial and 62 complete ORFs, one partial and three complete rRNA genes and a cluster of six tRNA genes. The direction of the transcription and translation of 61 ORFs is the same as that of the movement of the replication fork. A homology search of 40 ORFs in newly determined sequence revealed that 27 of them had significant similarity to known proteins such as elongation factor G, elongation factor Tu, pseudouridine synthase I and ribsosomal proteins. Two adjacent genes, ybaD and ybaE, appeared to encode proteins belonging to the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) family.    Within the Bacillus subtilis genome sequencing project, the region between lysA and ilvA was assigned to our laboratory. In this report we present the sequence of the last 36 kb of this region, between the kdg operon and the attachment site of the SP beta prophage. A two-step strategy was used for the sequencing. In the first step, total chromosomal DNA was cloned in phage M13-based vectors and the clones carrying inserts from the target region were identified by hybridization with a cognate yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) from our collection. Sequencing of the clones allowed us to establish a number of contigs. In the second step the contigs were mapped by Long Accurate (LA) PCR and the remaining gaps closed by sequencing of the PCR products. The level of sequence inaccuracy due to LA PCR errors appeared to be about 1 in 10,000, which does not affect significantly the final sequence quality. This two-step strategy is efficient and we suggest that it can be applied to sequencing of longer chromosomal regions. The 36 kb sequence contains 38 coding sequences (CDSs), 19 of which encode unknown proteins. Seven genetic loci already mapped in this region, xpt, metB, ilvA, ilvD, thyB, dfrA and degR were identified. Eleven CDSs were found to display significant similarities to known proteins from the data banks, suggesting possible functions for some of the novel genes: cspD may encode a cold shock protein; bcsA, the first bacterial homologue of chalcone synthase; exol, a 5&apos; to 3&apos; exonuclease, similar to that of DNA polymerase I of Escherichia coli; and bsaA, a stress-response-associated protein. The protein encoded by yplP has homology with the transcriptional NifA-like regulators. The arrangement of the genes relative to possible promoters and terminators suggests 19 potential transcription units.    Expression from the Bacillus subtilis nrg-21 locus Increases 26-fold during nitrogen-limited growth. The DNA corresponding to this locus was cloned and sequenced. The nucleotide sequence revealed a gene that could encode a protein with sequence similarity to the Escherichia coll gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) permease. A transposon insertion in this locus eliminated the uptake of GABA and severely inhibited the utilization of GABA as a nitrogen source. Primer extension analysis revealed that the B. subtilis gabP gene was transcribed from two overlapping promoters. Transcription from the P1 promoter was repressed during growth in the presence of amino acids. The product of the codY gene proved to be required for this repression. Transcription from the P2 promoter increased during nitrogen-limited growth and was dependent upon the product of the tnrA gene. Deletion analysis revealed that activation of the P2 promoter during nitrogen-limited growth requires a nucleotide sequence located upstream of its -35 region. Regulation of gabP expression by the CodY and TnrA regulatory systems, which respond to different physiological signals, allows for a wide range of gabP expression during growth on various nitrogen sources.    The PrfA protein, which is a member of the Crp/Fnr family of prokaryotic transcription activators, regulates the virulence genes of Listeria monocytogenes. In this work, specific binding of PrfA to its target DNA was determined by electrophoretic mobility-shift assays (EMSAs) using cell-free extracts from the two L. monocytogenes strains EGD and NCTC 7973. PrfA-specific binding differs between the two strains, even when the concentration of PrfA was adjusted to similar levels. Both strains exhibited increased PrfA-specific binding after a shift into minimal essential medium (MEM) without showing a significant change in the amount of PrfA protein, relative to extracts from bacteria grown in brain-heart infusion (BHI). The purified PrfA protein from strain EGD produced in Escherichia coli did not exhibit specific binding to the target DNA but did so upon addition of PrfA-free extracts from various Listeria species and Bacillus subtilis. The observed activation of PrfA seems to be caused by a PrfA-activating factor (Paf), which is probably a protein since elevated temperature, but not RNase treatment, destroyed the activation potential of such PrfA-free extracts. Moreover, fractionation of these extracts by sucrose gradient centrifugation yielded the Paf activity in a fraction sedimenting at 3.2 S. Specific binding of PrfA-containing extracts from strain EGD to the hly and actA promoter sequences was strongly inhibited by iron, whereas that of extracts from strain NCTC 7973 was only slightly reduced. The iron effect seems to be mediated by Paf rather than by PrfA itself.    Bacillus subtilis contains three chromosomally encoded type I signal peptidases (SipS, SipT and SipU), which remove signal peptides from secretory precursor proteins. In the present study the biological function of SipS and the regulation of its synthesis were analysed. Unlike the type I signal peptidase of Escherichia coli, SipS was essential neither for protein secretion nor viability of the cell. However, in the absence of SipS the rate of processing of several preproteins was reduced, and four of the seven major secreted proteins of B. subtilis were hardly detectable in the growth medium. Surprisingly, the processing of Bacillus amyloliquefaciens alpha-amylase and the secretion of at least two endogenous B. subtilis proteins was improved in the absence of SipS. These findings indicate that the substrate preference of SipS differs from that of SipT and SipU, and that SipS is an important factor determining the efficiency of protein secretion in B. subtilis. SipS is transcribed in a growth phase- and medium-dependent manner. In minimal medium, the growth phase-dependent transcription of sipS is controlled by the DegS-DegU two-component regulatory system, indicating that the expression of sipS is regulated by the same factors that control the expression of most genes for secreted degradative enzymes. Our observations suggest that B. subtilis can modulate its capacity and specificity for protein secretion through the controlled expression of sipS.    In Bacillus subtilis, hydrogen peroxide induces the synthesis of catalase (KatA), alkyl hydroperoxide reductase (AhpCF), and a DNA-binding protein of the Dps family (MrgA). KatA, AhpCF, heme biosynthesis enzymes, and MrgA are also induced upon entry into stationary phase under conditions of iron and manganese limitation. In an effort to define the peroxide regulon repressor, PerR, we used mini-Tn10 mutagenesis to identify loci affecting the regulation of mrgA. From this screen, we isolated two mini-Tn10 insertions in ahpC, the gene encoding the small subunit of AhpCF, that increase the transcription of mrgA-lacZ even in iron-supplemented minimal medium. Indeed, these ahpC::Tn10 insertions lead to elevated expression from all peroxide regulon promoters, including those for mrgA, katA, hemAXCDBL, and ahpCF. As a result, the ahpC::Tn10 mutants display an increased resistance to H2O2. The ahpCF promoter region contains three sequences similar to the peroxide regulon consensus operator (per box). We demonstrate that the ability of ahpC::Tn10 mutations to derepress mrgA requires aerobic growth. In contrast, a second distinct trans-acting regulatory mutation bypasses this requirement for aerobic growth. Since the peroxide regulon is activated in the absence of AhpCF, which degrades alkyl hydroperoxides, we propose that organic hydroperoxides may be physiologically relevant inducers in vivo.    The AhpC subunit of the Bacillus subtilis alkyl hydroperoxide reductase was identified as a general stress protein induced in response to heat or salt stress or after entry of the organism into the stationary phase. The ahp operon, encoding the two subunits AhpC and AhpF, was cloned and localized between the gntRKPZ operon and the bglA locus. Two-dimensional gel analyses revealed an especially strong induction of AhpC and AhpF in cells subjected to oxidative stress. Transcriptional studies showed a 3- to 4-fold induction of ahp mRNA after heat or salt stress or starvation for glucose and a 20-fold induction by oxidative stress, thus confirming the protein induction data for AhpC and AhpF. Stress induction occurred at a sigmaA-dependent promoter that overlaps with operator sites similar to the per box. Compared with the wild type, the ahpC mutant was resistant to hydrogen peroxide because of the derepression of the peroxide regulon (N. Bsat, L. Chen, and J. D. Helmann, J. Bacteriol. 178:6579-6586, 1996) but more sensitive to cumene hydroperoxide (CHP) during exponential growth. In contrast, stationary-phase wild-type and ahpC mutant cells displayed complete resistance to treatment with 1 mM CHP. Moreover, a sigmaB mutant was found to be extremely sensitive to CHP during vegetative growth and in stationary phase, which indicates that sigmaB-dependent general stress proteins are involved in the protection of cells against oxidative stress.    In Bacillus subtilis, the tryptophan-activated trp RNA-binding attenuation protein (TRAP) regulates expression of the seven tryptophan biosynthetic genes by binding to specific repeat sequences in the transcripts of the trp operon and of the folate operon, the operon containing trpG. Steinberg observed that strains containing a temperature-sensitive mutant form of tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase, encoded by the trpS1 allele, produced elevated levels of the tryptophan pathway enzymes, when grown at high temperatures in the presence of excess L-tryptophan (W. Steinberg, J. Bacteriol. 117:1023-1034, 1974). We have confirmed this observation and have shown that expression of two reporter gene fusions, trpE&apos;-&apos;lacZ and trpG&apos;-&apos;lacZ, is also increased under these conditions. Deletion of the terminator or antiterminator RNA secondary structure involved in TRAP regulation of trp operon expression eliminated the trpS1 effect, suggesting that temperature-sensitive expression was mediated by the TRAP protein. Analysis of expression of mtrB, the gene encoding the TRAP subunit, both by examination of a lacZ translational fusion and by measuring the intracellular levels of TRAP by immunoblotting, indicated that the trpS1-induced increase in trp gene expression was not due to inhibition of mtrB expression or to alteration of the amount of TRAP present per cell. Increasing the cellular level of TRAP by overexpressing mtrB partially counteracted the trpS1 effect, demonstrating that active TRAP was limiting in the trpS1 mutant. We also showed that elevated trp operon expression was not due to increased transcription initiation at the upstream aroF promoter, a promoter that also contributes to trp operon expression. We postulate that the increase in trp gene expression observed in the trpS1 mutant is due to the reduced availability of functional TRAP. This could result from inhibition of TRAP function by uncharged tRNA(Trp) molecules or by increased synthesis of some other transcript capable of binding and sequestering the TRAP regulatory protein.    Northern (RNA) blot analysis of the Bacillus subtilis biotin operon, bioWAFDBIorf2, detected at least two steady-state polycistronic transcripts initiated from a putative vegetative (Pbio) promoter that precedes the operon, i.e., a full-length 7.2-kb transcript covering the entire operon and a more abundant 5.1-kb transcript covering just the first five genes of the operon. Biotin and the B. subtilis birA gene product regulated synthesis of the transcripts. Moreover, replacing the putative Pbio promoter and regulatory sequence with a constitutive SP01 phage promoter resulted in higher-level constitutive synthesis. Removal of a rho-independent terminator-like sequence located between the fifth (bioB) and sixth (bioI) genes prevented accumulation of the 5.1-kb transcript, suggesting that the putative terminator functions to limit expression of bioI, which is thought to be involved in an early step in biotin synthesis.    Under iron-limiting conditions, Bacillus subtilis (Bs) produces the siderophore 2,3-dihydroxybenzoate (DHB) to acquire extracellular iron. In Escherichia coli (Ec), DHB is a precursor of the siderophore enterobactin, which suggested that Bs may possess similar biosynthetic enzymes. The sequences of two overlapping Bs clones capable of complementing Ec enterobactin mutants [Grossman, T.H., Tuckman, M., Ellestad, S. and Osburne, M.S. (1993) Isolation and characterization of Bacillus subtilis genes involved in siderophore biosynthesis: Relationship between B. subtilis sfpo and Escherichia coli entD genes. J. Bacteriol. 175, 6203-6211] were analyzed and five open reading frames were identified. These genes are located near 291 degrees on the Bs chromosome and have been termed dhbA, dhbC, dhbE, dhbB and dhbF, based on similarities to Ec ent homologs. Amino-acid identities between gene product homologs are: EntA and DhbA, 41%; EntC and DhbC, 35%; EntE and DhbE, 48%; EntB and DhbB, 54%; and EntF and DhbF, 29%. DhbC is also 35% identical to the Bs menaquinone-specific isochorismate synthase, MenF, illustrating an example of gene duplication. Operon disruption studies suggested that the dhb genes comprise an operon of at least four genes.    The solution structure of a type II DNA-binding protein, the bacteriophage SPO1-encoded transcription factor 1 (TF1), was determined using NMR spectroscopy. Selective 2H-labeling, 13C-labeling and isotopic heterodimers were used to distinguish contacts between and within monomers of the dimeric protein. A total of 1914 distance and dihedral angle constraints derived from NMR experiments were used in structure calculations using restrained molecular dynamics and simulated annealing protocols. The ensemble of 30 calculated structures has a root-mean-square deviation (r.m.s.d.) of 0.9 A, about the average structure for the backbone atoms, and 1.2 A for all heavy-atoms of the dimeric core (helices 1 and 2) and the beta-sheets. A severe helix distortion at residues 92-93 in the middle of helix 3 is associated with r.m.s.d. of approximately 1.5 A for the helix 3 backbone. Deviations of approximately 5 A or larger are noted for the very flexible beta-ribbon arms that constitute part of a proposed DNA-binding region. A structural model of TF1 has been calculated based on the previously reported crystal structure of the homologous HU protein and this model was used as the starting structure for calculations. A comparison between the calculated average solution structure of TF1 and a solution structure of HU indicates a similarity in the dimeric core (excluding the nine amino acid residue tail) with pairwise deviations of 2 to 3 A. The largest deviations between the average structure and the HU solution structure were found in the beta-ribbon arms, as expected. A 4 A deviation is found at residue 15 of TF1 which is in a loop connecting two helical segments; it has been reported that substitution of Glu15 by Gly increases the thermostability of TF1. The homology between TF1 and other proteins of this family leads us to anticipate similar tertiary structures.    We used potassium permanganate (KMnO4) to identify unpaired thymidine (T) residues in promoter complexes formed by RNA polymerase (RNAP) associated with sigma E (sigma E-RNAP) from Bacillus subtilis. We found that a region of the spoIIID promoter from at least -10 to +1 becomes melted in the presence of this polymerase. In promoter complexes formed by RNAP associated with a mutant sigma E that melts promoter DNA inefficiently, we noted additional KMnO4 sensitivity at the -11 position of the spoIIID promoter. We suggest that the base pair at -11 is unpaired in both mutant and wild type (wt) complexes; however, close proximity of wt sigma E-RNAP with the T at -11 may protect it from KMnO4 attack. The absence of a close contact between the mutant sigma E-RNAP and the base at -11 may explain why this polymerase uses promoters less efficiently than wt sigma E-RNAP.    In the bacterium Bacillus subtilis (Bs), the alternative transcription factor sigma B is activated by environmental stresses to control the expression of a large set of unlinked genes. However, the range of physiological functions mediated by these sigma B-controlled genes is presently unknown. We report here that the newly identified gene csbB is under the dual control of a sigma B-dependent and a sigma B-independent promoter. The predicted product of csbB is a 329 residue protein containing two potential membrane-spanning segments in its C-terminal region, leading us to speculate that one class of sigma B-controlled genes acts to modify the cell envelope as part of the general stress response.    The prs gene, encoding phosphoribosyl-diphosphate (PRPP) synthase, as well as the flanking DNA sequences were cloned and sequenced from the Gram-positive thermophile, Bacillus caldolyticus. Comparison with the homologous sequences from the mesophile, Bacillus subtilis, revealed a gene (gcaD) encoding N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphate uridyltransferase upstream of prs, and a gene homologous to ctc downstream of prs. cDNA synthesis with a B. caldolyticus gcaD-prs-ctc-specified mRNA as template, followed by amplification utilising the polymerase chain reaction indicated that the three genes are co-transcribed. Comparison of amino acid sequences revealed a high similarity among PRPP synthases across a wide phylogenetic range. An E. coli strain harbouring the B. caldolyticus prs gene in a multicopy plasmid produced PRPP synthase activity 33-fold over the activity of a haploid B. caldolyticus strain. B. caldolyticus PRPP synthase was resistant to heat treatment at 70 degrees C to a much higher extent than PRPP synthase from B. subtilis.    BACKGROUND: Differential gene expression during sporulation in the prespore and mother cell of Bacillus subtilis is dependent on the correct timing and localization of the activity of specific transcription (sigma) factors. The first sigma factor activated is sigmaF, which directs gene expression specifically in the prespore compartment. Release of sigmaF activity is tightly controlled through a series of complex interactions involving an anti-sigma factor, SpoIIAB, an anti-anti-sigma factor SpoIIAA and a phosphoprotein phosphatase SpoIIE. In vitro studies have shown that SpoIIAB binds to sigmaF, preventing transcription of the sigmaF regulon, and that it can also phosphorylate SpoIIAA, thereby inactivating it. However, non-phosphorylated SpoIIAA can displace sigmaF from SpoIIAB. The SpoIIE phosphatase provides a means of reactivating SpoIIAA-P. RESULTS: We have directly determined the cellular distributions of sigmaF, SpoIIAB, SpoIIAA-P and SpoIIAA during sporulation, using recently developed immunofluorescence methods. While sigmaF activity is restricted to the prespore, the protein is present in both compartments. As development proceeds the sigmaF signal disappears. The anti-sigma factor SpoIIAB is also distributed throughout both cells and rapidly disappears from both cellular compartments soon after sigmaF becomes active. Disappearance of SpoIIAB seems to be closely associated with the activation of the second prespore-specific sigma factor sigmaF. The distribution of phosphorylated SpoIIAA closely mimics that of SpoIIAB, being non-compartmentalized and disappearing soon after sigmaF activation occurs. Significantly, the active, non-phosphorylated form of the anti-anti-sigma factor, SpoIIAA, accumulates in the prespore just before sigmaF becomes active. CONCLUSION: These results support the hypothesis that the accumulation of SpoIIAA within the prespore is the single most important requirement for activation of sigmaF.    Cell-cell and starvation signals are funneled through the phosphorelay to initiate sporulation by activating the transcription regulator SpoOA. Activation of SpoOA leads to synthesis of the transcription factors sigmaF and sigmaE. Substantial advances have been made in our understanding of the signal circuitry of the phosphorelay and of the cell-type-specific activation of the sigma factors.    Genetic and biochemical analysis of exopolysaccharide (EPS) production in lactic acid bacteria has been a growing field of interest in the food industry. We previously identified and characterized a gene cluster composed of 13 genes (epsA to epsM) responsible for EPS production in Streptococcus thermophilus Sfi6. Here we report one further gene, pbp2b, that is connected to EPS production. Mutants with a gene disruption in pbp2b were no longer able to produce EPS, exhibited a reduced growth-rate, and their cell morphology was altered. The predicted gene product showed significant homology to the class B penicillin-binding proteins 2b of Streptococcus pneumoniae, Streptococcus sanguis and Streptococcus mitis involved in peptidoglycan synthesis. Upstream of pbp2b, we further identified two genes which showed significant homology to the E. coli folD and urfl, which is an unidentified open reading frame presumed to be involved in DNA repair. Downstream of pbp2b, we identified a gene that showed homology to the Bacillus subtilis and the Escherichia coli recM or recR which, respectively, are involved in the methyl-dependent DNA mismatch repair. In S. thermophilus, pbp2b and recM were transcribed from their own promoters as monocistronic mRNAs and are therefore organized as independent transcriptional units.    It has been hypothesized that the dinR gene product of Bacillus subtilis acts as a repressor of the SOS regulon by binding to DNA sequences located upstream of SOS genes, including dinR and recA. Following activation as a result of DNA damage, RecA is believed to catalyse DinR-autocleavage, thus derepressing the SOS regulon. The present results support this hypothesis: a dinR insertion mutation caused a high, constitutive expression of both dinR and recA, which could not be further elevated by SOS-induction. In addition, gel-retardation assays demonstrated a direct interaction between the dinR gene product and the recA and dinR promoter regions. Epistatic interactions and gel-retardation assays demonstrated that the previously reported competence-specific expression of recA directly depended upon the gene product of comK, the competence transcription factor. These data demonstrate the existence of a direct regulatory link between the competence signal-transduction pathway and the SOS reguion.    Penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs) are enzymes involved in the synthesis of peptidoglycan structures in Bacillus subtilis such as the vegetative cell wall and the spore cortex. The B. subtilis sequencing project has identified a gene (orf16, EMBL accession number D38161) which exhibits significant sequence similarity to genes encoding class B high-molecular-weight PBPs. We have found that orf16 encodes PBP3 and have renamed this locus pbpC. Transcriptional fusions to lacZ were used to demonstrate that pbpC is transcribed primarily during log-phase growth, with lower amounts expressed during sporulation. During spore germination and outgrowth, pbpC expression resumes coincident with an increase in the optical density of the culture. The major promoter for pbpC is located just upstream of the gene; a low level of expression during sporulation appears to originate from much further upstream. Loss of PBP3 does not produce any detectable change in phenotype with respect to cell morphology, growth, sporulation, spore heat resistance, or spore germination and outgrowth. This was also true when the pbpC mutation was combined with mutations affecting other PBP-encoding genes to produce double mutants. These findings are consistent with previous evidence that many PBPs of B. subtilis have redundant functions within the cell.    The acquisition of genetic competence by Bacillus subtilis is repressed when the growth medium contains Casamino Acids. This repression was shown to be exerted at the level of expression from the promoters of the competence-regulatory genes srfA and comK and was relieved in strains carrying a null mutation in the codY gene. DNase I footprinting experiments showed that purified CodY binds directly to the srfA and comK promoter regions.    In-frame deletions of pilA and pilS were constructed in Myxococcus xanthus with a plasmid integration-excision strategy facilitated by sacB. sacB conferred sucrose sensitivity upon its M. xanthus host only when it lay in the same orientation as adjacent M. xanthus genes. Gene orientation also affected the efficiency of sucrose counterselection in the sucrose-sensitive strains. The deltapilA mutant lacked pili and social motility, while the deltapilS mutant showed no defect in either phenotype.    The Bacillus subtilis pyr operon is regulated by a transcriptional attenuation mechanism that requires the PyrR regulatory protein. Multicopy plasmids that could be transcribed to yield segments of RNA from the attenuation regions of the pyr operon induced derepression of chromosomal pyr genes, whereas plasmids that could not yield pyr RNA did not. We conclude that pyr RNA acts by titrating the PyrR protein and preventing it from regulating pyr attenuation.    The developmental regulatory protein sigmaF of Bacillus subtilis, a member of the sigma70-family of RNA polymerase sigma factors, is regulated negatively by the antisigma factor SpoIIAB, which binds to sigmaF to form an inactive complex. Complex formation between SpoIIAB, which contains an inferred adenosine nucleotide binding pocket, and sigmaF is stimulated strongly by the presence of ATP. Here we report that SpoIIAB contacts sigmaF at three widely spaced binding surfaces corresponding to conserved regions 2.1, 3.1, and 4.1 of sigma70-like sigma factors. This conclusion is based on binding studies between SpoIIAB and truncated portions of sigmaF, the isolation of mutants of sigmaF that were partially resistant to inhibition by SpoIIAB in vivo and were defective in binding to the antisigma factor in vitro, and the creation of alanine substitution mutants of regions 2.1, 3.1, or 4.1 of sigmaF that were impaired in complex formation. Because the interaction of SpoIIAB with all three binding surfaces was stimulated by ATP, we infer that ATP induces a conformational change in SpoIIAB that is needed for tight binding to sigmaF. Finally, we discuss the possibility that another antisigma factor, unrelated to SpoIIAB, may interact with its respective sigma factor in a similar topological pattern of widely spaced binding surfaces located in or near conserved regions 2.1, 3.1, and 4.1.    The general stress response of the bacterium Bacillus subtilis is governed by a signal transduction network that regulates activity of the sigma(B) transcription factor. We show that this network comprises two partner-switching modules, RsbX-RsbS-RsbT and RsbU-RsbV-RsbW, which contribute to regulating sigma(B). Each module consists of a phosphatase (X or U), an antagonist protein (S or V), and a switch protein/kinase (T or W). In the downstream module, the W anti-sigma factor is the primary regulator of sigma(B) activity. If the V antagonist is phosphorylated, the W switch protein binds and inhibits sigma(B). If V is unphosphorylated, it complexes W, freeing sigma(B) to interact with RNA polymerase and promote transcription. The phosphorylation state of V is controlled by opposing kinase (W) and phosphatase (U) activities. The U phosphatase is regulated by the upstream module. The T switch protein directly binds U, stimulating phosphatase activity. The T-U interaction is governed by the phosphorylation state of the S antagonist, controlled by opposing kinase (T) and phosphatase (X) activities. This partner-switching mechanism provides a general regulatory strategy in which linked modules sense and integrate multiple signals by protein-protein interaction.    RNA polymerase (RNAP) isolated from Staphylococcus aureus is deficient in sigma factor and is poorly active in transcription assays. Based on amino acid sequence homology of the Bacillus subtilis vegetative sigma factor sigmaA and the predicted product of the chromosomally located plaC gene of S. aureus, it was hypothesized that plaC could encode the vegetative sigma factor. We cloned plaC under a T7 promoter and overexpressed it in Escherichia coli strain BL21(DE3)pLysE. The overproduced protein, present in inclusion bodies, was solubilized with guanidine hydrochloride, renatured, and purified by DEAE-Sephacel and Sephadex G-75 chromatography. The purified protein, designated sigmaSA, cross-reacted with the B. subtilis anti-sigmaA antibody. E. coli core RNAP, reconstituted with sigmaSA, initiated promoter-specific transcription from the S. aureus promoters hla, sea, and sec and from the E. coli promoters rpoH P1, rpoH P4, and ColE1 RNA-1, which are recognized by the E. coli sigma70. sigmaSA, when added to the purified RNAP from S. aureus, stimulated transcriptional activity of the RNAP up to 72-fold. As determined by primer extension studies, the 5&apos;-ends of the sigmaSA-initiated mRNAs synthesized in vitro from the agr P2 and sea promoters are in general agreement with the 5&apos;-ends of the cellular RNAs. Disruption of the plaC gene on the S. aureus chromosome was lethal. We conclude that plaC encodes the primary sigma factor in S. aureus.    The gene for transcription termination factor Rho was isolated from Streptomyces lividans ZX7. It encoded a 77-kDa polypeptide (Rho 77) with considerable homology to known Rho factors. An atypical hydrophilic region of 228 residues was found within the N-terminal RNA-binding domain. Only Rho from Micrococcus luteus and Mycobacterium leprae (closely related GC-rich Gram-positive bacteria) had an analogous sequence. Rho 77 was overexpressed in Escherichia coli and purified using an N-terminal hexahistidine-tag. Rho 77 displayed a broad RNA-dependent ATPase activity, with poly(C) RNA being no more than 4-fold more effective than poly(A). This contrasts with the ATPase activity of Rho from E. coli which is stimulated primarily by poly(C) RNA. Rho 77 was a general RNA-dependent NTPase, apparent Km values for NTPs were: GTP 0.13 mM, ATP 0.17 mM, UTP 1.1 mM, and CTP &gt;2 mM. Rho 77 poly(C)-dependent ATPase activity was inhibited by heparin, unlike the E. coli Rho. The antibiotic bicyclomycin inhibited the in vitro RNA-dependent ATPase activity of Rho 77, did not inhibit growth of streptomycetes but delayed the development of aerial mycelia. N-terminal deletion analysis to express a truncated form of Rho (Rho 72, 72 kDa) indicated that the first 42 residues of Rho 77 were not essential for RNA-dependent NTPase activity and were not the targets of inhibition by heparin or bicyclomycin.    We identified a new chromosomal locus involved in the virulence of the facultative intracellular pathogen Listeria monocytogenes. This locus displays the same genetic organization as that of the clpC/mecB locus of Bacillus subtilis. It contains a thermoregulated operon of four genes, whose transcription is upregulated at 42 degrees C. The last gene of this operon is clpC, which encodes a protein of 826 amino acid residues, identified as a ClpC ATPase, sharing a strong peptide sequence identity (78%) with ClpC/MecB of B. subtilis. Tn917 insertions inactivating the entire operon, or only clpC, gave mutants highly susceptible to stress, including iron limitation, elevated temperatures and high osmolarity. The virulence of these mutants was severely impaired in the mouse. A clpC insertional mutant was also restricted in its capacity to grow in bone-marrow-derived macrophages. These results demonstrate that the ClpC ATPase of L. monocytogenes is a general stress protein involved in intracellular growth and in vivo survival of this pathogen in host tissues.    During endospore formation in Bacillus subtilis an asymmetric division produces two cells, forespore and mother cell, which follow different developmental paths. Commitment to the forespore-specific developmental path is controlled in part by the activation of the forespore-specific RNA polymerase sigma factor, sigma F. Activity of sigma F is inhibited in the mother cell by the anti-sigma factor SpoIIAB. In the forespore, sigma F directs transcription of the structural gene for sigma G. However, sigma G does not become active until after engulfment of the forespore is complete. This sigma G activity is dependent upon the products of the spoIIIA operon. We showed that sigma G is present but mostly inactive in a spoIIIA mutant. We also demonstrated that the anti-sigma factor SpoIIAB can bind to sigma G in vitro. Moreover, a mutant form of sigma G that binds SpoIIAB inefficiently in vitro was shown to function independently of SpoIIIA during sporulation. These and previously reported results support a model in which SpoIIAB functions as an inhibitor of sigma G activity during sporulation. Therefore, we propose that the anti-sigma factor SpoIIAB antagonizes both sigma F and sigma G activities, and that this antagonism is relieved in the forespore in two stages. In the first stage, which follows septation, a SpoIIAA-dependent mechanism partially relieves SpoIIAB inhibition of sigma F activity in the forespore. In the second stage, which follows forespore engulfment, a SpoIIIA-dependent process inactivates SpoIIAB in the forespore, resulting in the activation of sigma G.    Phage 2C is a Bacillus subtilis lytic phage, whose genome contains hydroxymethyluracil in place of thymine. To isolate promoters of early phage genes involved in the take-over of cellular metabolism, 2C DNA libraries were constructed in promoter-probe plasmids replicating in Escherichia coli and B. subtilis. Four different 2C DNA fragments strongly expressed reporter genes in E. coli but not in B. subtilis. All fragments originated from unique sequences of the genome and not from its terminal redundancies. One fragment was sequenced. Despite the presence of an sigma-A-RNA polymerase binding site upstream of the transcriptional initiation site of a 2C early gene, this fragment did not promote transcription in B. subtilis.    The rolling-circle plasmid pGP1 was used to study the effects of the expression of a plasmid-specified exported protein on structural plasmid stability in Bacillus subtilis. pGP1 contains a fusion between the Bacillus licheniformis penP gene, encoding a C-terminally truncated penicillinase, and the Escherichia coli beta-galactosidase (lacZ) gene. Two processes affected the accumulation of pGP1 variants with deletions in the penP-lacZ region. First, divergent transcription from genes upstream of penP-lacZ increased pGP1 deletion frequencies up to about 10-fold. Second, the removal of the PenP signal peptide resulted in completely stable plasmids, indicating that the entry of the PenP fragment into the protein export pathway is an important factor in the instability of pGP1. On the basis of these results, we propose a model in which the temporary anchoring of the plasmid to the membrane through the cotranscriptional and cotranslational entry of PenP into the protein export pathway creates domains of local hypersupercoiling, which we assume to be targets for deletion formation.    The 11-subunit trp RNA-binding attenuation protein of Bacillus subtilis, TRAP, regulates transcription and translation by binding to several (G/U)AG repeats present in the trp leader and trpG transcripts. Filter binding assays were used to study interactions between L-tryptophan-activated TRAP and synthetic RNAs. RNAs that contained GAG and/or UAG repeats were tested while the length and sequence of the nucleotides separating adjacent trinucleotide repeats were altered. TRAP-RNA complexes formed with transcripts containing GAG repeats were more stable than those with transcripts containing UAG repeats or alternating GAG and UAG repeats. The stability of TRAP-RNA complexes also increased substantially when the number of GAG repeats was increased from five to six and from six to seven. A gradual increase in complex stability was observed when the number of GAG repeats was increased from 7 to 11. The optimal spacer between adjacent trinucleotide repeats was found to be 2 nucleotides, with A and U residues preferred over G and C residues. TRAP binding was specific for single-stranded RNA; TRAP could not bind to RNA containing GAG repeats base paired in a stable RNA duplex. Overall, our findings suggest that each L-tryptophan-activated TRAP subunit can bind one (G/U)AG repeat and that multiple TRAP subunit-RNA binding site interactions are required for stable TRAP-RNA association.    The establishment of genetic competence in Bacillus subtilis is controlled by a vast signal transduction network involving the products of genes that function in several postexponential-phase processes. Two of these proteins, SinR and DegU, serve as molecular switches that influence a cell&apos;s decision to undergo either sporulation or genetic competence development. In order to determine the roles of SinR and DegU in competence control, multicopy suppression experiments with plasmid-amplified comS, SinR, and degU genes were undertaken. Multicopy comS was found to elevate competence gene transcription and transformation efficiency in both wild-type and sinR mutant cells but not in degU mutant cells. Multicopy degU failed to suppress comS or sinR mutations. No suppression of comS or degU by multicopy sinR was observed. The expression of a comS&apos;::&apos;lacZ translational fusion and srf-lacZ operon fusion was examined in sinR cells and cells bearing plasmid-amplified sinR. The expression of comS&apos;::&apos;lacZ gene fusion was reduced by the sinR mutation, but both comS&apos;::&apos;lacZ and srf-lacZ were repressed by multicopy sinR. Cells bearing plasmid-amplified sinR were poorly competent. These results suggest that sinR is required for optimal comS expression but not transcription from the srf promoter and that SinR at high concentrations represses srf transcription initiation.    Synthesis of the osmoprotectant glycine betaine from the exogenously provided precursor choline or glycine betaine aldehyde confers considerable osmotic stress tolerance to Bacillus subtilis in high-osmolarity media. Using an Escherichia coli mutant (betBA) defective in the glycine betaine synthesis enzymes, we cloned by functional complementation the genes that are required for the synthesis of the osmoprotectant glycine betaine in B. subtilis. The DNA sequence of a 4.1-kb segment from the cloned chromosomal B. subtilis DNA was established, and two genes (gbsA and gbsB) whose products were essential for glycine betaine biosynthesis and osmoprotection were identified. The gbsA and gbsB genes are transcribed in the same direction, are separated by a short intergenic region, and are likely to form an operon. The deduced gbsA gene product exhibits strong sequence identity with members of a superfamily of specialized and nonspecialized aldehyde dehydrogenases. This superfamily comprises glycine betaine aldehyde dehydrogenases from bacteria and plants with known involvement in the cellular adaptation to high-osmolarity stress and drought. The deduced gbsB gene product shows significant similarity to the family of type III alcohol dehydrogenases. B. subtilis mutants with defects in the chromosomal gbsAB genes were constructed by marker replacement, and the growth properties of these mutant strains in high-osmolarity medium were analyzed. Deletion of the gbsAB genes destroyed the choline-glycine betaine synthesis pathway and abolished the ability of B. subtilis to deal effectively with high-osmolarity stress in choline- or glycine betaine aldehyde-containing medium. Uptake of radiolabelled choline was unaltered in the gbsAB mutant strain. The continued intracellular accumulation of choline or glycine betaine aldehyde in a strain lacking the glycine betaine-biosynthetic enzymes strongly interfered with the growth of B. subtilis, even in medium of moderate osmolarity. A single transcription initiation site for gbsAB was detected by high-resolution primer extension analysis. gbsAB transcription was initiated from a promoter with close homology to sigma A-dependent promoters and was stimulated by the presence of choline in the growth medium.    Mechanisms of gene regulation have not yet been extensively studied in thermophilic bacteria. In previous studies we showed that the Bacillus stearothermophilus argCJBD gene cluster is subject to specific repression by arginine. Here we report the cloning by colony hybridization, and characterization of the proximal part of the argC gene together with the adjacent control region of the cluster. The promoter was identified by primer extension mapping of the argC transcription startpoint: a sequence overlapping it was found to be similar to the arginine operators of B. subtilis and to a smaller extent of E. coli. Use of an argC-lacZ gene fusion revealed that the argC promoter is strongly repressed by the heterologous B. subtilis arginine repressor/activator AhrC in E. coli cells. Mobility shift and DNase I footprinting experiments revealed tight, specific and arginine-dependent binding of this operator-like sequence to purified AhrC. It is therefore very likely that in B. stearothermophilus the expression of the argCJBD operon is modulated by a repressor that is the thermophilic homologue of AhrC.    Regulatory protein p4 from Bacillus subtilis phage phi 29 represses the strong viral A2c promoter (PA2c) by preventing promoter clearance; it allows RNA polymerase to bind to the promoter and form an initiated complex, but the elongation step is not reached. Protein p4 binds at PA2c immediately upstream from RNA polymerase; repression involves a contact between both proteins that holds the RNA polymerase at the promoter. This contact is held mainly through p4 residue Arg120, which is also required for activation of the phi 29 late A3 promoter. We have investigated which region of RNA polymerase contacts protein p4 at PA2c. Promoter repression was impaired when a reconstituted RNA polymerase lacking the 15 C-terminal residues of the alpha subunit C-terminal domain was used; this polymerase was otherwise competent for transcription. Binding cooperativity assays indicated that protein p4 cannot interact with this mutant RNA polymerase at PA2c. Protein p4 could form a complex at PA2c with purified wild-type alpha subunit, but not with a deletion mutant lacking the 15 C-terminal residues. Our results indicate that protein p4 represses PA2c by interacting with the C-terminal domain of the alpha subunit of RNA polymerase. Therefore, this domain of the alpha subunit can receive regulatory signals not only from transcriptional activators, but from repressors also.    Expression of the Bacillus subtilis nrgAB operon is derepressed during nitrogen-limited growth. We have identified a gene, tnrA, that is required for the activation of nrgAB expression under these growth conditions. Analysis of the DNA sequence of the tnrA gene revealed that it encodes a protein with sequence similarity to GlnR, the repressor of the B. subtilis glutamine synthetase operon. The tnrA mutant has a pleiotropic phenotype. Compared with wild-type cells, the tnrA mutant is impaired in its ability to utilize allantoin, gamma-aminobutyrate, isoleucine, nitrate, urea, and valine as nitrogen sources. During nitrogen-limited growth, transcription of the nrgAB, nasB, gabP, and ure genes is significantly reduced in the tnrA mutant compared with the levels seen in wild-type cells. In contrast, the level of glnRA expression is 4-fold higher in the, tnrA mutant than in wild-type cells during nitrogen restriction. The phenotype of the tnrA mutant indicates that a global nitrogen regulatory system is present in B. subtilis and that this system is distinct from the Ntr regulatory system found in enteric bacteria.    We have purified and characterized an extracellular peptide factor that serves as a cell density signal for both competence development and sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. This competence and sporulation stimulating factor (CSF) was purified from conditioned medium (culture supernatant) based on its ability to stimulate expression of srfA (comS) in cells at low cell density. CSF is a 5-amino-acid peptide, glu-arg-gly-met-thr (ERGMT), that is, the carboxy-terminal 5 amino acids of the 40-amino-acid peptide encoded by phrC. No detectable CSF was produced in a phrC null mutant. The activity of chemically synthesized CSF (ERGMT) was virtually indistinguishable from that of CSF that was purified from culture supernatants. At relatively low concentrations (1-10 nM), CSF stimulated expression of srfA, whereas high concentrations of CSF stimulated the ability of cells at low cell density to sporulate. Stimulation of srfA expression by CSF requires the oligopeptide permease encoded by spo0K, a member of the ATP-binding-cassette family of transporters, and the putative phosphatase encoded by rapC, the gene immediately upstream of phrC. RapC was found to be a negative regulator of srfA expression, suggesting that the target of RapC is the transcription factor encoded by comA. We propose that CSF is transported into the cell by the Spo0K oligopeptide permease and stimulates competence gene expression by inhibiting (either directly or indirectly) the RapC phosphatase.    Expression of the sacPA and sacB genes of Bacillus subtilis is positively modulated by transcriptional regulatory proteins encoded by the sacT and sacY genes, respectively. Previous genetic studies led to the suggestion that SacT and SacY function as nascent mRNA binding proteins preventing early termination of transcription at terminators located in the leader regions of the corresponding genes. Here we report the overproduction, purification to near homogeneity, and characterization of the two antiterminators, SacT and SacY. Using mRNA band migration retardation assays and a reconstituted transcriptional antitermination system, the mRNA binding functions and antitermination activities of purified SacT and SacY are demonstrated under in vitro conditions. The results establish for the first time that members of the BglG family of antiterminators function in antitermination in the absence of other proteins in vitro. Purified SacT is shown to be phosphorylated by phosphoenolpyruvate in a phosphotransferase-catalyzed reaction dependent on Enzyme I and HPr. Unexpectedly, the purified SacT is shown to be functional in mRNA binding and in transcriptional antitermination independently of its phosphorylation state.    Competence in Bacillus subtilis is expressed post-exponentially in response to signals which are interpreted by a complex network of regulatory proteins. This network culminates in the transcriptional activation of a set of late-competence proteins that mediate DNA binding and uptake during transformation. ComK, a protein that binds to competence promoters and appears to activate their transcription, is itself synthesized in response to the signal-transduction network. ComK is known to be required for the transcription of its own gene. We have placed comK under control of the xylose-inducible PxylA promoter and used this construct to show that ComK synthesis is sufficient as well as necessary to induce competence. We have also confirmed that the Mec proteins act post-transcriptionally to inactivate ComK, probably by protein-protein interaction. We have further demonstrated that ComS is required to generate an upstream signal that causes reversal of Mec-induced inactivation of ComK. In addition to ComK itself, DegU, AbrB, and SinR are required for comK transcription; mutations in their genes are bypassed by PxylA-comK induction, and therefore their products appear not to act via the Mec proteins. Overproduction of ComK, in a loss-of-function mec mutant, is also known to bypass the need for DegU, SinR and AbrB. We propose that these proteins enhance the activity of ComK as a positive autoregulatory transcription factor, acting as coactivator proteins when ComK is present at low concentrations. Finally, we demonstrate that when ComK is synthesized from the PxylA promoter and mecA is inactivated by mutation, no additional growth-stage-regulated control of competence can be detected.    The gene ccpA encoding the catabolite control protein CcpA of Staphylococcus xylosus has been cloned and characterized. The CcpA protein belongs to the Lacl/GaiR family of bacterial regulators and is comprised of 329 amino acids, with a molecular mass of 36.3 kDa. It shows 56% identity with the CcpA proteins of Bacillus subtills and Bacillus megaterium. Inactivation of the ccpA gene in the genome of S. xylosus relieved the activities of three enzymes, alpha-glucosidase, beta-glucuronidase, and beta-galactosidase, from cataboilte repression by several carbohydrates. Concomitantly, transcription initiation of the maltose-utilization operon malRA, including the alpha-glucosidase gene malA, was no longer subject to glucose-specific control. Carbon source-dependent malRA regulation was also lost upon deletion of a palindromic sequence in the malRA promoter region resembling the catabolite-responsive elements essential for CcpA-dependent catabolite repression in Bacillus. These results strongly suggest that S. xylosus CcpA controls transcription of catabolite-repressible genes and operons by binding to catabolite-responsive operators when rapidly metabolizable carbohydrates are available. Accordingly, the cloned S. xylosus ccpA gene could complement the ccpA mutation in B. subtilis. The ccpA gene of S. xylosus is transcribed from two promoters, one of which is subject to autogenous repression by CcpA. Autoregulation results in a slight reduction of CcpA protein in glucose-grown cells. The characterization of the role of CcpA in carbon catabolite repression in S. xylosus demonstrates that a regulatory mechanism originally detected in Bacillus applies to another Gram-positive bacterium with low GC content.    The nucleotide sequence of a new Bacillus subtilis gene (amhX) was determined that encodes a protein (AmhX) with strong sequence identity to amidohydrolases from both plant and bacterial species and a carboxypeptidase from the archaeon Sulfolobus sulfataricus. The amhX gene encodes a hydrophilic polypeptide of 383 amino acids with a molecular mass of 41.5 kDa. The amhX gene was overexpressed in E. coli by using the T7 RNA polymerase/promoter system and the transcription initiation sites for the amhX mRNAs in B. subtilis were determined by primer extension analysis. Chromosomal amhX mutations were constructed by marker replacement and the amhX gene was positioned at 25 degrees on the genetic and physical map of the B. subtilis chromosome.    The Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) cryIIIA gene is regulated by a different mechanism from that of most of the other cry genes. Its expression begins during late-exponential growth and not during sporulation as for the other classes of cry genes. Moreover, in Bacillus subtilis, cryIIIA expression is independent of the major sporulation-specific sigma factors and is increased in a spoOA genetic background. We used lacZ fusions and primer-extension analysis to follow the time-course of cryIIIA transcription in Bt wild-type and in various Spo- genetic backgrounds (spoOA, sigE and sigK). cryIIIA was activated from the end of vegetative growth to stage II of sporulation (t3) in the wild-type strain. Thereafter, transcription from the same promoter continued, at a decreasing rate, until the end of stage III. In the spoOA mutant strain, the same promoter was activated for at least 15 h during the stationary phase. cryIIIA activation in the sigK genetic background was similar to that in the wild-type but was extended in a sigma E mutant strain. Thus cryIIIA expression in Bt is not directly dependent on the major sporulation-specific sigma factors. Furthermore, an event linked with the thE-dependent period of sporulation ends cryIIIA activation, although transcription of this gene does not switch off before the end of stage III.    We describe the identification of five transcriptional units under the control of the sporulation transcription factor sigma F in Bacillus subtilis. These are csfA, csfB, csfC, csfD, and csfF, located at approximately 230 degrees, 2 degrees, 316 degrees, 205 degrees, and approximately 290 degrees, respectively, on the genetic map. Null mutations in csfA, csfB, csfC, or csfD, either alone or together, do not cause a noticeable defect in sporulation or germination.    Three genes encoding enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of pyrimidines have been found to constitute an operon in Lactococcus lactis. Two of the genes are the well-known pyr genes pyrDb and pyrF, encoding dihydroorotate dehydrogenase and orotidine monophosphate decarboxylase, respectively. The third gene encodes a protein which was shown to be necessary for the activity of the pyrDb-encoded dihydroorotate dehydrogenase; we propose to name the gene pyrK. The pyrK-encoded protein is homologous to a number of proteins which are involved in electron transfer. The lactococcal pyrKDbF operon is highly homologous to the corresponding part of the much-larger pyr operon of Bacillus subtilis. orf2, the pyrK homolog in B. subtilis, has also been shown to be necessary for pyrimidine biosynthesis (A. E. Kahler and R. L. Switzer, J. Bacteriol. 178:5013-5016, 1996). Four genes adjacent to the operon, i.e., orfE, orfA, orfC, and gidB, were also sequenced. Three of these were excluded as members of the pyr operon by insertional analysis (orfA) or by their opposite direction of transcription (orfE and gidB). orfC, however, seems to be the distal gene in the pyrKDbF-orfC operon.    Mutations in the spoIIE locus of Bacillus subtilis block sporulation at the stage of asymmetric septation and prevent compartment-specific activation of the transcription factor delta F. Recent ultrastructural studies of spoIIE mutants led to the conclusion that cells blocked at the stage of asymmetric septation form primarily thick septal structures similar to those formed at the mid-cell site during vegetative growth, although in an earlier study Piggot (J. Bacteriol. 114:1241-1253, 1973) clearly detected a more complex range of phenotypes. We have examined the phenotypes of six spoIIE mutants, including one example of the previously studied null type, spoIIE21. We confirmed that the spoIIE21 mutant and two other null mutants exhibit the classic thick-septum phenotype. However, two of the missense mutants, the spoIIE64 and spoIIE71 mutants, were found to display a strikingly different phenotype characterized by the presence of only thin asymmetric septa, frequently at both polar positions, as noted by Piggot. This phenotype is essentially identical to those of spoIIA (delta F) and spoIIG (delta E) null mutants, which also form sporulation septa that appear structurally normal at the level of electron microscopy. Despite the formation of apparently normal asymmetric septa, spoIIE64 and spoIIE71 mutants are fully defective in activation of delta F-dependent gene expression. These results indicate that the functional roles performed by SpoIIE in septum assembly and sigma factor regulation are distinct and separable.    The expression of the major vegetative phase-specific autolysin genes (cwlB [lytC] and cwlG [lytD]) was greatly reduced by mecA and mecB null mutations. In contrast to the negative effects on late competence genes (such as comG) and levansucrase gene (sacB) expression, this positive effect of mec genes on autolysin gene expression was not mediated through the ComK protein but apparently through the level of the SigD protein. The pleiotropic effects of the mec mutations, i.e., the reduction of sigD expression and the overexpression of the ComK protein, seem not to be interwoven since the SigD- and ComK-dependent functions are clearly separable in the mec mutants. We also show that the synthesis of the flagellin protein, which is encoded by the SigD-dependent hag gene, was similarly affected by the mec mutations. Complementation analysis with a SigD-overproducing plasmid, pHYSigD, in mec mutants revealed the reversion of almost all of the SigD-dependent phenotypes except motility. This finding suggested that Mec proteins act on motility genes at two levels, one of which is apparently SigD independent. Finally, we discuss the transcriptional regulation of the sigD gene by multiple regulators, i.e., MecA, MecB, SinR (FlaD), and DegS-DegU, and its implications for cells in a global context.    To identify genes expressed at intermediate stages of Bacillus subtilis sporulation, we screened for sigma E-dependent promoters. One promoter that we found drives expression of an operon consisting of at least five open reading frames (ORFs). The predicted products of the first three ORFs are very homologous to enzymes involved in fatty acid metabolism, including acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) acetyltransferase (thiolase), 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase, and acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, respectively. We showed that the fourth ORF encoded a third isozyme of citrate synthase in B. subtilis. Genetic evidence and primer extension results showed that transcription of this operon is directed by the mother cell compartment-specific sigma factor, sigma E, and so the operon was named mmg (for mother cell metabolic genes). Furthermore, we found that a sequence (mmgO) with homology to a catabolite-responsive element mediates glucose repression of mmg promoter activity during sporulation and that this repression was lost in a ccpA mutant.    A locus encoding polypeptides associated with flagellar structure and function was identified, sequenced, and characterized in Treponema phagedenis and Treponema pallidum. This locus includes homologs of the FlgD, FlgE, MotA, MOB, FliL, and FliM polypeptides found in Salmonella typhimurium and Bacillus subtilis. These polypeptides are extensively conserved between the two treponemes. Several additional polypeptides or unknown function, including Tapl, located upstream of FlgD, and ORF4, located between FlgE and MotA, were also identified. Transcription analysis using RNA PCR indicated that these genes are likely transcribed as part of a single operon and comprise the 5&apos; region of the treponemal fla operon. Primer extension analysis identified a putative promoter, preceding T. phagedenis tap1 in a region of divergent transcription. Pfla resembles the class II or class III motility-related promoters of S. typhimurium. FlgE and Tap1 were further characterized. Western blotting (immunoblotting) indicated that T. pallidum FlgE exhibited an unusual polypeptide ladder that was similar but not identical to that of T. phagedenis. Triton X-114 phase partitioning of T. phagedenis cells coupled with Western blotting revealed that Tap1 was located in the aqueous phase. Computer analysis indicated that Tap1 had no significant membrane spanning regions, suggesting that it resides primarily in the cytoplasm. The organization and expression of this operon are similar in both treponemes but different from those of previously described motility-related operons. These results indicate that despite extensive amino acid sequence conservation, the expression of spirochete flagellar polypeptides is different from that in other bacteria.    We have identified a new Bacillus subtilis gene, spoVT, whose gene product is homologous to the transcriptional regulator AbrB and serves as a regulator of E sigmaG-controlled gene expression. SpoVT acts both positively and negatively in controlling sigmaG-dependent gene expression, providing an additional level of refinement to forespore gene regulation and feedback control of spoIIIG expression.    A 50-kDa hemolymph protein, having strong affinity to the cell wall of Gram(-) bacteria, was purified from the hemolymph of the silkworm, Bombyx mori. The cDNA encoding this Gram(-) bacteria-binding protein (GNBP) was isolated from an immunized silkworm fat body cDNA library and sequenced. Comparison of the deduced amino acid sequence with known sequences revealed that GNBP contained a region displaying significant homology to the putative catalytic region of a group of bacterial beta-1,3 glucanases and beta-1,3-1,4 glucanases. Silkworm GNBP was also shown to have amino acid sequence similarity to the vertebrate lipopolysaccharide receptor CD14 and was recognized specifically by a polygonal anti-CD14 antibody. Northern blot analysis showed that GNBP was constitutively expressed in fat body, as well as in cuticular epithelial cells of naive silkworms. Intense transcription was, however, rapidly induced following a cuticular or hemoceolien bacterial challenge. An mRNA that hybridized with GNBP cDNA was also found in the l(2)mbn immunocompetent Drosophila cell line. These observations suggest that GNBP is an inducible acute phase protein implicated in the immune response of the silkworm and perhaps other insects.    The final sigma54-dependent DmpR activator regulates transcription of the dmp operon that encodes the enzymes for catabolism of (methyl)phenols. DmpR is expressed constitutively, but its transcriptional promoting activity is controlled positively in direct response to the presence of aromatic pathway substrates (effectors). DmpR has a distinct domain structure with the amino-terminal A-domain controlling the specificity of activation of the regulator by aromatic effectors (signal reception), a central C-domain mediating an ATPase activity essential for transcriptional activation, and a carboxyl-terminal D-domain involved in DNA binding. Deletion of the A-domain has been shown previously to result in an effector-independent transcriptional activator with constitutive ATPase activity. These results, in conjunction with the location of mutations within the A- and C-domains which exhibit an effector-independent (semiconstitutive) property, have led to a working model in which the A-domain serves to mask the ATPase and transcriptional promoting activity of the C-domain in the absence of effectors. To investigate the mechanism by which the A-domain exerts its repressive effect, we developed a genetic system to select positively for intramolecular second site revertants of DmpR. The results demonstrate (i) that mutations within the A-domain can suppress the semiconstitutive activity of C-domain located mutations and vice versa; (ii) that the C-domain located mutations do not influence the intrinsic ATPase and transcriptional promoting property of the C-domain in the absence of the A-domain; and (iii) that semiconstitutive mutations of the A- and C-domain have an additive effect. Taken together these results support a model in which the A-domain represses the function(s) of the C-domain by direct interactions between residues of the two domains.    Two peaks of aspartate aminotransferase (AspAT) catalytic activity were observed during DEAE chromatography of a protein extract from alkalophilic B. circulans. The enzyme purified from the major peak appeared to be not aspartate but phosphoserine aminotransferase (PSAT) with a considerably high AspAT side activity. The sequence of the enzyme N-terminus was determined, and the PSAT gene was cloned as two separate fragments. DNA sequencing revealed the open reading frame for the PSAT starting from TTG, putative ribosomal binding site and terminator of transcription. The PSAT gene encodes a protein of 361 amino acids (M(r) 39793) which shows moderate homology to other known phosphoserine aminotransferases (36-46% of identity, 60-64% of similarity). The PSAT from the alkalophile shares with all of them the consensus sequence pattern around the pyridoxal 5&apos;-phosphate attachment site.    The pyrimidine base 5-(hydroxymethyl)-2&apos;-deoxyuridine (HmU) is a common nucleotide in SPO1 phage DNA. Numerous transcriptional proteins bind HmU-containing DNA preferentially implicating a regulatory function of HmU. We have investigated the conformation and dynamics of d-(5&apos;-CHmUCHmUACACGHmUGHmUAGAG-OH-3&apos;)2 (HmU-DNA). This oligonucleotide mimics the consensus sequence of Transcription Factor 1 (TF1). The HmU-DNA was compared to the thymine-containing oligonucleotide. NOESY and DQF COSY spectroscopy provided resonance assignments of nonexchangeable and exchangeable protons, intranucleotide, internucleotide and intrastrand proton-proton distances, and dihedral angle constraints. Methylene protons of the hydroxymethyl group are nonequivalent protons and the hydroxymethyl group is not freely rotating. The hydroxymethyl group adopts a specific orientation with the OH group oriented on the 3&apos; side of the plane of the base. Analysis of imino proton resonances and NOEs indicates additional end base pair fraying and a temperature-induced transition to a conformation in which the internal HmU-A base pairs are disrupted or have reduced lifetimes. Orientation of the hydroxymethyl group indicates the presence of internucleotide intrastrand hydrogen bonding between the HmU12C5 hydroxyl group and A13. All sugars in both DNAs show a C2&apos;endo conformation (typical of B-DNA).    TF1 is a member of the family of type II DNA-binding proteins, which also includes the bacterial HU proteins and the Escherichia coli integration host factor (IHF). Distinctive to TF1, which is encoded by the Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage SPO1, is its preferential binding to DNA in which thymine is replaced by 5-hydroxymethyluracil (hmU), as it is in the phage genome. TF1 binds to preferred sites within the phage genome and generates pronounced DNA bending. The extent to which DNA flexibility contributes to the sequence-specific binding of TF1, and the connection between hmU preference and DNA flexibility has been examined. Model flexible sites, consisting of consecutive mismatches, increase the affinity of thymine-containing DNA for TF1. In particular, tandem mismatches separated by nine base-pairs generate an increase, by orders of magnitude, in the affinity of TF1 for T-containing DNA with the sequence of a preferred TF1 binding site, and fully match the affinity of TF1 for this cognate site in hmU-containing DNA (Kd approximately 3 nM). Other placements of loops generate suboptimal binding. This is consistent with a significant contribution of site-specific DNA flexibility to complex formation. Analysis of complexes with hmU-DNA of decreasing length shows that a major part of the binding affinity is generated within a central 19 bp segment (delta G0 = 41.7 kJ mol-1) with more-distal DNA contributing modestly to the affinity (delta delta G = -0.42 kJ mol-1 bp-1 on increasing duplex length to 37 bp). However, a previously characterised thermostable and more tightly binding mutant TF1, TF1(E15G/T32I), derives most of its extra affinity from interaction with flanking DNA. We propose that inherent but sequence-dependent deformability of hmU-containing DNA underlies the preferential binding of TF1 and that TF1-induced DNA bendings is a result of distortions at two distinct sites separated by 9 bp of duplex DNA.    The RNA polymerase sigma factor sigma B is a stress-response regulatory protein in Bacillus subtilis. The activity of sigma B is controlled in part by RsbW, a protein that inhibits sigma B, and RsbV, a protein that counteracts this inhibition. We now demonstrate that purified RsbW is capable of forming alternative complexes with either sigma B or RsbV. Sigma B in the RsbW. sigma B complex was transcriptionally inactive. RsbV reversed this inhibition by sequestering RsbW in a RsbW-RsbV complex, thereby allowing sigma B to remain free and active. In contrast to interactions among the components of the homologous regulatory system for the sporulation transcription factor sigma F, the binding of RsbW to RsbV and sigma B did not require adenosine nucleotides. Experiments involving the exchange of proteins between the two regulatory systems demonstrated that RsbW and its homolog in the sigma F system, SpoIIAB, exhibit strong preference in binding to RsbV and sigma B, and SpoIIAA and sigma F, respectively, and that the difference in nucleotide-dependence of binding between these two systems is attributable to a difference between RsbW and SpoIIAB. In confirmation and extension of previous results, we show that RsbW is also a protein kinase that uses ATP to phosphorylate RsbV, thereby blocking the capacity of RsbV to bind to RsbW and activate transcription. A close correlation was observed between the concentration of ATP required for efficient RsbW-mediated phosphorylation of RsbV, inhibition of RsbW.RsbV comlex formation, and inhibition of sigma B-directed transcription. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that activation of sigma B under certain stress condition is due to a decrease in cellular ATP levels.    The Bacillus subtilis transcription factor sigma F is a cell-type specific regulatory protein whose activity is governed by SpoIIAB and SpoIIAA and the nucleotides ATP and ADP. SpoIIAB is an anti-sigma factor that binds to sigma F in a manner that is stimulated by ATP, thereby trapping sigma F in an inactive complex. Alternatively, SpoIIAB binds to SpoIIAA in a manner that is stimulated by ADP to form a SpoIIAB.SpoIIAA complex in which SpoIIAB is sequestered from sigma F. SpoIIAB is also a protein kinase that uses ATP to phosphorylate, and thereby inactivate, SpoIIAA. Thus, ATP inhibits sigma F activity both by promoting formation of the SpoIIAB.sigma F complex and by phosphorylation of SpoIIAA. In extension of previous results, we use affinity chromatography to show that SpoIIAB is capable of forming long-lived complexes with sigma F and SpoIIAA and that the formation of these complexes is dependent on ATP and ADP, respectively. Using a DNA template lacking adenosine residues on the non-transcribed strand, we demonstrate that ATP is required for SpoIIAB-mediated inhibition of sigma F-directed RNA synthesis and that this inhibition is prevented by SpoIIAA in a manner that is stimulated by ADP. We show that ADP acts by protecting SpoIIAA from phosphorylation by SpoIIAB and that a mutant protein bearing an amino acid substitution at the site of phosphorylation in SpoIIAA is capable of preventing the inhibition of sigma F in a manner that does not depend on ADP. A principal finding from the investigation is that SpoIIAA restores activity to sigma F that had previously been inhibited by SpoIIAB. This is demonstrated both by the capacity of SpoIIAA to reverse SpoIIAB-mediated inhibition of sigma F-directed RNA synthesis and by its capacity to interact with and disrupt the SpoIIAB. sigma F complex. The results are consistent with a model in which sigma F is controlled by the cellular concentration of unphosphorylated SpoIIAA.    The threonyl-tRNA synthetase gene, thrS, is a member of a family of Gram-positive genes that are induced following starvation for the corresponding amino acid by a transcriptional antitermination mechanism involving the cognate uncharged tRNA. Here we show that an additional level of complexity exists in the control of the thrS gene with the mapping of an mRNA processing site just upstream of the transcription terminator in the thrS leader region. The processed RNA is significantly more stable than the full-length transcript. Under nonstarvation conditions, or following starvation for an amino acid other than threonine, the full-length thrS mRNA is more abundant than the processed transcript. However, following starvation for threonine, the thrS mRNA exists primarily in its cleaved form. This can partly be attributed to an increased processing efficiency following threonine starvation, and partly to a further, nonspecific increase in the stability of the processed transcript under starvation conditions. The increased stability of the processed RNA contributes significantly to the levels of functional RNA observed under threonine starvation conditions, previously attributed solely to antitermination. Finally, we show that processing is likely to occur upstream of the terminator in the leader regions of at least four other genes of this family, suggesting a widespread conservation of this phenomenon in their control.    RNA polymerases encounter specific DNA sites at which RNA chain elongation takes place in the absence of enzyme translocation in a process called discontinuous elongation. For RNA polymerase II, at least some of these sequences also provoke transcriptional arrest where renewed RNA polymerization requires elongation factor SII. Recent elongation models suggest the occupancy of a site within RNA polymerase that accommodates nascent RNA during discontinuous elongation. Here we have probed the extent of nascent RNA extruded from RNA polymerase II as it approaches, encounters, and departs an arrest site. Just upstream of an arrest site, 17-19 nucleotides of the RNA 3&apos;-end are protected from exhaustive digestion by exogenous ribonuclease probes. As RNA is elongated to the arrest site, the enzyme does not translocate and the protected RNA becomes correspondingly larger, up to 27 nucleotides in length. After the enzyme passes the arrest site, the protected RNA is again the 18-nucleotide species typical of an elongation-competent complex. These findings identify an extended RNA product groove in arrested RNA polymerase II that is probably identical to that emptied during SII-activated RNA cleavage, a process required for the resumption of elongation. Unlike Escherichia coli RNA polymerase at a terminator, arrested RNA polymerase II does not release its RNA but can reestablish the normal elongation mode downstream of an arrest site. Discontinuous elongation probably represents a structural change that precedes, but may not be sufficient for, arrest by RNA polymerase II.    Inactivation of femC in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) results in lowered methicillin resistance and a reduction in the amidation of the iso-D-glutamate of the peptidoglycan stem peptide. The femC phenotype is due to insertional inactivation of the glutamine synthetase repressor gene glnR by Tn551, which has a polar effect on glutamine synthetase (glnA) transcription. The complete glutamine synthetase operon (glnRA) of S. aureus was cloned and sequenced, and its transcriptional start was determined. The deduced amino acid sequence of the staphylococcal glutamine synthetase showed 76% identity and 87% similarity to the Bacillus subtilis glutamine synthetase. The staphylococcal glnRA operon was shown to complement an Escherichia coli glutamine synthetase-negative mutant and to restore methicillin resistance in femC mutants. femC mutants revert to resistance in the presence of high concentrations of methicillin. These revertants, which still carried the femC lesion, were shown to retain the lowered amidation of the iso-D-glutamate peptidoglycan stem peptide. A new chromosomal locus hmrC was postulated to have mutated to allow expression of high methicillin resistance in these femC revertants. Although the highly resistant hmrC revertant resembled phenotypically the highly methicillin-resistant subclones occurring in heterogeneously resistant MRSA, we could show by transduction that the locus hmrC was distinct from chr*, a chromosomal site postulated to confer high methicillin resistance in heterogeneous MRSA. This suggests that S. aureus can adopt multiple ways to achieve high methicillin resistance.    A 10-kb region of the Bacillus subtilis genome that contains genes involved in biotin-biosynthesis was cloned and sequenced. DNA sequence analysis indicated that B. subtilis contains homologs of the Escherichia coli and Bacillus sphaericus bioA, bioB, bioD, and bioF genes. These four genes and a homolog of the B. sphaericus bioW gene are arranged in a single operon in the order bioWAFDR and are followed by two additional genes, bioI and orf2. bioI and orf2 show no similarity to any other known biotin biosynthetic genes. The bioI gene encodes a protein with similarity to cytochrome P-450s and was able to complement mutations in either bioC or bioH of E. coli. Mutations in bioI caused B. subtilis to grow poorly in the absence of biotin. The bradytroph phenotype of bioI mutants was overcome by pimelic acid, suggesting that the product of bioI functions at a step prior to pimelic acid synthesis. The B. subtilis bio operon is preceded by a putative vegetative promoter sequence and contains just downstream a region of dyad symmetry with homology to the bio regulatory region of B. sphaericus. Analysis of a bioW-lacZ translational fusion indicated that expression of the biotin operon is regulated by biotin and the B. subtilis birA gene.    The IepA operon of Bacillus subtilis was found to be bicistronic and to consist of the two genes IepA and hemN, which encode a putative GTP-binding protein and an oxygen-independent coproporhyrinogen III oxidase, respectively. The IepA operon is located immediately upstream of the dnaK operon. Both operons are transcribed in the same direction and are not separated by an obvious transcription-terminator-like structure. The IepA operon is preceded by a potential vegetative promoter, and there is a putative strong intergenic terminator between IepA and hemN. Northern blot experiments revealed only a transcript corresponding to IepA, but expression of hemN was demonstrated in slot-blot and immunoblot experiments using antibodies raised against His-tagged HemN. The data suggest that most of the transcripts originating at the potential vegetative promoter are terminated at the intergenic terminator. Readthrough transcription into the downstream dnaK operon was not found.    The expression of the Bacillus subtilis lysC operon, which encodes the first specific enzyme of lysine biosynthesis, is controlled by the availability of the end product, lysine. The question of whether lysine exerts its control by inducing premature termination of transcription was addressed using Northern blot analysis. Whereas lys-C-specific RNA from lysine-starved B. subtilis consisted primarily of the expected full-length mRNA (1.6 kb), that from bacteria grown with an excess of lysine consisted of a truncated 0.27 kb RNA in place of the full-length 1.6 kb transcript. On the other hand, a B. subtilis aecA mutant, in which the lysC operon was derepressed owing to a single nucleotide substitution in the region corresponding to the lysC leader transcript, produced full-length lysC mRNA, but no 0.27 kb RNA, even during growth with excess lysine. Mapping of the truncated 0.27 kb lysC RNA by hybridization with oligonucleotide probes showed that it corresponded to the upstream portion of the lysC leader transcript, extending from the transcription initiation site to a putative rho-independent terminator element. Quantitative transcript analysis by hybridization with specific oligonucleotides showed that lysine did not affect the number of lysC-specific RNA molecules but promoted the stoichiometric replacement of full-length mRNA with truncated 0.27 kb molecules. These results indicate that lysine regulates the expression of the lysC operon by effecting the premature termination of transcription at a rho-independent terminator site in the lysC leader region and that the site of the aecA mutation, far upstream of the putative terminator element, must play an essential role in premature transcription termination by a mechanism which is not yet understood.    Degenerate PCR probes were used to amplify gene fragments encoding the catalytic domain of sigma54-dependent transcription activators. The procedure should be widely applicable, as it recovered both known and novel gene fragments: 5 from Rhizobium meliloti, 13 from Myxococcus xanthus, and 3 from Bacillus subtilis. No fragments were obtained from Synechococcus sp. strain PCC 7002 or Saccharomyces cerevisiae.    In Bacillus subtilis, activity of the general stress transcription factor sigma B is controlled posttranslationally by a regulatory network that transmits signals of environmental and metabolic stress. These signals include heat, ethanol, or osmotic challenge, or a sharp decrease in cellular energy levels, and all ultimately control sigma B activity by influencing the binding decision of the RsbW anti-sigma factor. In the absence of stress, RsbW binds to sigma B and prevents its association with RNA polymerase core enzyme. However, following stress, RsbW binds instead to the RsbV anti-anti-sigma factor, thereby releasing sigma B to direct transcription of its target genes. These two principal regulators of sigmaB activity are encoded in the eight-gene sigB operon, which has the gene order rsbR-rsbS-rsbT-rsbU-rsbV-rsbW-sig B-rsbX (where rsb stands for regulator of sigma B). Notably, the predicted rsbS product has significant amino acid identity to the RsbV anti-anti-sigma factor and the predicted rsbT product resembles the RsbW anti-sigma factor. To determine the roles of rsbS and rsbT, null or missense mutations were constructed in the chromosomal copies or each and tested for their effects on expression of a sigma B-dependent reporter fusion. On the basis of this genetic analysis, our principal conclusions are that (i) the rsbS product is a negative regulator of or&quot; activity, (ii) the rsbT product is a positive regulator, (iii) RsbS requires RsbT for function, and (iv) the RsbS-RsbT and RsbV-RsbW pairs act hierarchically by a common mechanism in which key protein-protein interactions are controlled by phosphorylation events.    Bacillus subtilis can grow anaerobically in the presence of nitrate as a terminal electron acceptor. The two component regulatory proteins, ResD and ResE, and an anaerobic gene regulator, FNR, were previously shown to be indispensable for nitrate respiration in B. subtilis. Unlike Escherichia coli fnr, B. subtilis fnr transcription was shown to be highly induced by oxygen limitation. fnr is transcribed from its own promoter as well as from a promoter located upstream of narK, the first gene in the narK-fnr dicistronic operon. DNA fragments containing the narK promoter, the fnr promoter, and both of the promoters were used to construct three lacZ fusions to examine the transcriptional regulation of the narK-fnr operon. ResDE was found to be required for transcriptional activation of fnr from the fnr-specific promoter, and FNR was required for activation of narK-fnr transcription from the FNR-dependent narK operon promoter under anaerobiosis. In order to determine if the requirement for ResDE in nitrate respiration is solely to activate fnr transcription, fnr was placed under control of the IPTG (isopropyl-beta-D-thiogalactopyranoside)-inducible promoter, Pspac. The observed defect in anaerobic growth of a Pspac-fnr delta resDE mutant in the presence of IPTG indicated that resDE has an additional role in B. subtilis anaerobic gene regulation.    Two genes, hom and thrB, involved in threonine biosynthesis in Lactococcus lactis MG1614, were cloned and sequenced. These genes, which encode homoserine dehydrogenase and homoserine kinase, were initially identified by the homology of their gene products with known homoserine dehydrogenases and homoserine kinases from other organisms. The identification was supported by construction of a mutant containing a deletion in hom and thrB that was unable to grow in a defined medium lacking threonine. Transcriptional analysis showed that the two genes were located in a bicistronic operon with the order 5&apos; hom-thrB 3&apos; and that transcription started 66 bp upstream of the translational start codon of the hom gene. A putative -10 promoter region (TATAAT) was located 6 bp upstream of the transcriptional start point, but no putative -35 region was identified. A DNA fragment covering 155 bp upstream of the hom translational start site was functional in pAK80, an L. lactis promoter probe vector. In addition, transcriptional studies showed no threonine-dependent regulation of hom-thrB transcription.    Regulatory protein p4 from Bacillus subtilis phage phi29 activates transcription from the viral late A3 promoter by stabilizing sigmaA-RNA polymerase at the promoter as a closed complex. Activation requires an interaction between protein p4 and RNA polymerase mediated by the protein p4 carboxyl-end, mainly through residue Arg-120. We have obtained derivatives of B. subtilis RNA polymerase alpha subunit with serial deletions at the carboxyl-end and reconstituted RNA polymerase holoenzymes harboring the mutant alpha subunits. Protein p4 promoted the binding of purified B. subtilis RNA polymerase alpha subunit to the A3 promoter in a cooperative way. Binding was abolished by deletion of the last 15 amino acids of the alpha subunit. Reconstituted RNA polymerases with deletions of 15 to 59 residues at the alpha subunit carboxyl-end could recognize and transcribe viral promoters not activated by protein p4, but they had lost their ability to recognize the A3 promoter in the presence of protein p4. In addition, these mutant reconstituted RNA polymerases could not interact with protein p4. We conclude that protein p4 activation of the viral A3 promoter requires an interaction between the carboxyl-end of protein p4 and the carboxyl-end of the alpha subunit of B. subtilis RNA polymerase that stabilizes the RNA polymerase at the promoter.    BACKGROUND: Spore formation in Bacillus subtilis takes place in a sporangium consisting of two compartments called the forespore and the mother cell. Late in development, when the forespore is wholly contained within the mother cell, gene transcription is coordinated between the compartments by an intercellular signal transduction pathway. This pathway operates at the level of proteolytic processing of the proprotein precursor (pro-sigma K to the mother-cell transcription factor sigma K. The conversion of pro-sigma K to sigma K is governed by the putative processing enzyme SpoIVFB and its negative regulator SpoIVFA, which are produced in the mother cell. RESULTS: We used fluorescence microscopy in conjunction with antibodies against SpoIVFA and SpoIVFB and a fusion of SpoIVFB to the Green Fluorescent Protein from Aquorea victoria to visualize these proteins in the sporangium. Both proteins were found to co-localize with the forespore region of the sporangium, a finding consistent with the idea that SpoIVFA and SpoIVFB, which are inferred to be integral membrane proteins, are located in the mother cell membrane that surrounds the forespore. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that SpoIVFA and SpoIVFB are situated at the boundary between the forespore and the mother cell, at which location SpoIVFB could be activated by a signalling protein produced in the forespore.    Conjugation of Agrobacterium tumefaciens wide-host-range octopine-type Ti plasmids is regulated by the LuxR-type transcriptional activator TraR in conjunction with an acylated homoserine lactone designated AAI. Expression of traR in octopine-type Ti plasmids is stimulated by OccR in response to octopine, an opine released from crown gall tumours, and is also positively autoregulated by TraR and AAI. Genetic and physical mapping of these promoters indicates that the OccR-activated promoter lies 14.5 kb upstream of traR, while the TraR-activated promoter lies 6 kb upstream. The upstream portion of the 14.5 kb operon contains seven previously characterized genes that direct the uptake and catabolism of octopine. The TraR-activated promoter lies just downstream from the octopine catabolic genes, and transcribes six genes in addition to traR, including five genes (ophABCDE) that show strong homology to oligo-peptide permeases of Salmonella typhimurium and Bacillus subtilis. Several TraR-regulated promoters overlap with 18 bp inverted repeats called tra boxes. In contrast, the traR autoregulatory promoter is not associated with a consensus tra box.    The sigmaB subunit of Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase governs the expression of a large general stress regulon. The results of pulse-chase and immunoprecipitation experiments showed that sigmaB is stable both in the presence and in the absence of the RsbW anti-sigma factor, the principal regulator of sigmaB in response to environmental signals.    Three genes involved in gluconate metabolism, gntR, gntK, and gntU, which code for a regulatory protein, a gluconate kinase, and a gluconate transporter, respectively, were cloned from Escherichia coli K-12 on the basis of their known locations on the genomic restriction map. The gene order is gntU, gntK, and gntR, which are immediately adjacent to asd at 77.0 min, and all three genes are transcribed in the counterclockwise direction. The gntR product is 331 amino acids long, with a helix-turn-helix motif typical of a regulatory protein. The gntK gene encodes a 175-amino-acid polypeptide that has an ATP-binding motif similar to those found in other sugar kinases. While GntK does not show significant sequence similarity to any known sugar kinases, it is 45% identical to a second putative gluconate kinase from E. coli,gntV. The 445-amino-acid sequence encoded by gntU has a secondary structure typical of membrane-spanning transport proteins and is 37% identical to the gntP product from Bacillus subtilis. Kinetic analysis of GntU indicates an apparent Km for gluconate of 212 microM, indicating that this is a low-affinity transporter. Studies demonstrate that the gntR gene is monocistronic, while the gntU and gntK genes, which are separated by only 3 bp, form an operon. Expression of gntR is essentially constitutive, while expression of gntKU is induced by gluconate and is subject to fourfold glucose catabolite repression. These results confirm that gntK and gntU, together with another gluconate transport gene, gntT, constitute the GntI system for gluconate utilization, under control of the gntR gene product, which is also responsible for induction of the edd and eda genes of the Entner-Doudoroff pathway.    The alternative sigma factor sigma D directs transcription of a number of genes involved in chemotaxis, motility, and autolysis in Bacillus subtilis (sigmaD regulon). The activity of SigD is probably in contrast to that of FlgM, which acts as an antisigma factor and is responsible for the coupling of late flagellar gene expression to the assembly of the hook-basal body complex. We have characterized the effects of an in-frame deletion mutation of flgM. By transcriptional fusions to lacZ, we have shown that in FlgM-depleted strains there is a 10-fold increase in transcription from three different sigmaD-dependent promoters, i.e., Phag, PmotAB, and PfliDST. The number of flagellar filaments was only slightly increased by the flgM mutation. Overexpression of FlgM from a multicopy plasmid under control of the isopropyl-beta-D-thiogalactopyranoside-inducible spac promoter drastically reduced the level of transcription from the hag promoter. On the basis of these results, we conclude that, as in Salmonella typhimurium, FlgM inhibits the activity of SigD, but an additional element is involved in determining the number of flagellar filaments.    Cp-1, a bacteriophage infecting Streptococcus pneumoniae, has a linear double-stranded DNA genome, with a terminal protein covalently linked to its 5&apos; ends, that replicates by the protein-priming mechanism. We describe here the complete DNA sequence and transcriptional map of the Cp-1 genome. These analyses have led to the firm assignment of 10 genes and the localization of 19 additional open reading frames in the 19,345-bp Cp-1 DNA. Striking similarities and differences between some of these proteins and those of the Bacillus subtilis phage phi 29, a system that also replicates its DNA by the protein-priming mechanism, have been revealed. The genes coding for structural proteins and assembly factors are located in the central part of the Cp-1 genome. Several proteins corresponding to the predicted gene products were identified by in vitro and in vivo expression of the cloned genes. Mature major head protein from the virion particles results from hydrolysis of the primary gene product at the His-49 residue, whereas the phage gene is expressed in Escherichia coli without modification. We have also identified two open reading frames coding for proteins that show high degrees of similarity to the N- and C-terminal regions, respectively, of the single tail protein identified in phi 29. Sequencing and primer extension analysis suggest transcription of a small RNA showing a secondary structure similar to that of the prohead RNA required for the ATP-dependent packaging of phi 29 DNA. On the basis of its temporal expression, transcription of the Cp-1 genome takes place in two stages, early and late. Combined Northern (RNA) blot and primer extension experiments allowed us to map the 5&apos; initiation sites of the transcripts, and we found that only three genes were transcribed from right to left. These analyses reveal that there are also noticeable differences between Cp-l and phi 29 in transcriptional organization. Considered together, the observations reported here provide new tangible evidence on phylogenetic relationships between B. subtilis and S. pneumoniae.    In Bacillus subtilis, expression of the tryptophan biosynthetic genes is regulated in response to tryptophan by an RNA-binding protein called TRAP (trp RNA-binding attenuation protein). TRAP has been shown to contain 11 identical subunits arranged in a symmetrical ring. Kinetic and thermodynamic parameters of the interaction between tryptophan-activated TRAP and trp leader RNA were studied. Results from glycerol gradients and mobility shift gels indicate that two TRAP 11-mers bind to each trp leader RNA. A filter binding assay was used to determine an apparent binding constant of 8.0 +/- 1.3 x 10(9) m-1 (Kd = 0.12 +/- 0.02 nM) for TRAP and an RNA containing residues +36 to +92 of the trp leader RNA in 1 mM L-tryptophan at 37 degrees C. The temperature dependence of Kapp was somewhat unexpected demonstrating that the delta H of the interaction is highly unfavorable at + 15.9 kcal mol-1. Therefore, the interaction is completely driven by a delta S of +97 cal mol-1 K-1. The interaction between tryptophan-activated TRAP and trp leader RNA displayed broad salt and pH activity profiles. Finally, the rate of RNA dissociation from the RNA-TRAP.tryptophan ternary complex was found to be very slow in high concentrations of tryptophan (&gt; 40 microM) but increased in lower tryptophan concentrations. This suggests that dissociation of tryptophan from the ternary complex is the rate-limiting step in RNA dissociation.    In Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis replication fork arrest occurs in the terminus at sequence-specific sites by the binding of replication terminator proteins to the fork arrest sites. The protein-DNA complex causes polar arrest of the replication forks by inhibiting the activity of the replicative helicases in only one orientation of the terminus with respect to the replication origin. This activity has been named as polar contrahelicase. In this paper we report on a second novel activity of the terminator proteins of E.coli and B.subtilis, namely the ability of the proteins to block RNA chain elongation by several prokaryotic RNA polymerases in a polar mode. The replication terminator proteins ter and RTP of E.coli and B.subtilis respectively, impeded RNA chain elongation catalyzed by T7, SP6 and E.coli RNA polymerases in a polar mode at the replication arrest sites. The RNA chain anti-elongation and the contrahelicase activities were isopolar. Whereas one monomer of ter was necessary and sufficient to block RNA chain elongation, two interacting dimers of RTP were needed to effect the same blockage. The biological significance of the RNA chain anti-elongation activity is manifested in the functional inactivation of a replication arrest site by invasion of RNA chains from outside, and the consequent need to preserve replication arrest activity by restricting the passage of transcription through the terminus-terminator protein complex.    Bacillus megaterium contains a cytochrome P-450 fatty acid mono-oxygenase which is inducible with barbiturate drugs. We have demonstrated that this enzyme system is inducible with peroxisome proliferators. In mammals, peroxisome proliferators also induce mono-oxygenases in the CYP4A gene family. In this paper we demonstrate that the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs ibuprofen, ketoprofen and indomethacin are potent inducers of fatty acid mono-oxygenase activity as well as of P-450BM-3 protein in B. megaterium. The levels of induction of P-450 protein were 11.8-, 3.9- and 3.0-fold respectively. In addition, we demonstrate that these inducing agents interact with a transcriptional repressor, Bm3R1, which leads to its dissociation from its operator sequence. This provides a rational mechanism for the induction process. This is the first report which demonstrates that non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs can interact directly with a transcription factor to initiate gene expression, and further substantiates the structure-activity relationships that identify inducers of cytochrome P-450BM-3 and compounds that have the potential to act as peroxisome proliferators and induce CYP4A expression in mammals.    Repression of transcription of the abrB gene is essential to expression of many of the postexponential genes in Bacillus. The repression is due to the activity of the response regulator protein Spo0A. We have used in vitro transcription and DNase I and hydroxyl radical footprinting to explore the mechanism of transcription inhibition. Spo0A binds to specific DNA sequences (0A boxes), and two such boxes are found downstream of the tandem promoters for the abrB gene. The data indicate that both RNA polymerase and Spo0A bind simultaneously to a DNA fragment containing the promoters and the 0A boxes. The Spo0A prevents the polymerase from inducing DNA strand denaturation at the promoter for the abrB gene.    Until recently, only one mechanism of catabolite repression in bacteria, a mechanism dependent on the cyclic AMP receptor protein of Escherichia coli, was understood in molecular detail. Two cyclic AMP-independent catabolite repression mechanisms are currently under study. One such mechanism, found in E. coli, involves the catabolite repressor/activator (Cra) protein (formerly designated the fructose repressor FruR) which represses sugar catabolic systems and activates sugar anabolic systems. When catabolites bind to Cra, Cra dissociates from the DNA causing catabolite activation and catabolite repression, respectively. The second such mechanism, found in Bacillus subtilis, involves a catabolite-activated, ATP-dependent protein kinase that phosphorylates a specific seryl residue in the small phosphocarrier protein, HPr, of the phosphotransferase system. HPr(ser-P) binds to a transcription factor, CcpA, to promote DNA binding. DNA binding of the complex in turn promotes catabolite repression or catabolite activation, depending on the target operon. The characterization of these novel mechanisms establishes that cyclic AMP-independent catabolite control is operative in bacteria, and that multiple mechanisms of catabolite control evolved independently of each other.    The product of the codY gene is required for nutritional repression of the Bacillus subtillis dipeptide permease operon (dpp), an operon expressed at early stationary phase in nutrient-rich medium. Though unrelated to any known DNA-binding protein, CodY was shown to bind specifically to the dpp promoter region. DNase I footprinting experiments revealed that the CodY-protected region encompasses the dpp transcription start site and overlaps with the region protected by another regulatory protein, AbrB. CodY and AbrB were found to compete, in vitro, for binding to the dpp promoter region. Binding of CodY was altered in mutants defective in nutritional regulation.    clpC of Bacillus subtilis is part of an operon containing six genes. Northern blot analysis suggested that all genes are co-transcribed and encode stress-inducible proteins. Two promoters (PA and PB) were mapped upstream of the first gene. PA resembles promoters recognized by the vegetative RNA polymerase E sigma A. The other promoter (PB) was shown to be dependent on sigma B, the general stress sigma factor in B. subtilis, suggesting that clpC, a potential chaperone, is expressed in a sigma B-dependent manner. This is the first evidence that sigma B in B. subtilis is involved in controlling the expression of a gene whose counterpart, clpB, is subject to regulation by sigma 32 in Escherichia coli, indicating a new function of sigma B-dependent general stress proteins. PB deviated from the consensus sequence of sigma B promoters and was only slightly induced by starvation conditions. Nevertheless, strong induction by heat, ethanol, and salt stress occurred at the sigma B-dependent promoter, whereas the vegetative promoter was only weakly induced under these conditions. However, in a sigB mutant, the sigma A-like promoter became inducible by heat and ethanol stress, completely compensating for sigB deficiency. Only the downstream sigma A-like promoter was induced by certain stress conditions such as hydrogen peroxide or puromycin. These results suggest that novel stress-induction mechanisms are acting at a vegetative promoter. Involvement of additional elements in this mode of induction are discussed.    Transcription of the Bacillus thuringiensis cryIIIA toxin gene is initiated at nucleotide position -558 (relative to the cryIIIA start codon). However, the major cryIIIA transcript is an mRNA with its 5&apos; end at nucleotide position -129. Fusions to the lacZ reporter gene revealed that the cryIIIA 5&apos; untranslated region downstream of nucleotide position -129 acts as a 5&apos; mRNA stabilizer. Deletion and mutation analysis suggest that the determinant of stability is a Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequence close to the 5&apos; end of the stable transcript. This SD sequence, designated STAB-SD, does not direct translation initiation. However, mutations predicted to weaken the putative interaction between the SD sequence and the 3&apos; end of 16S rRNA lead to reduced mRNA stability. The binding of a 30S subunit to STAB-SD may be required for stabilization of cryIIIA mRNA as a transcript with a 5&apos; end at nucleotide position -129. Similar STAB-SD sequences are found in the 5&apos; untranslated regions of other cryIII genes, and in the 5&apos; untranslated regions of genes from Gram-positive bacteria other than B. thuringiensis and may therefore be a widespread determinant of mRNA stability.    Relatively limited information about promoter structures in Corynebacterium glutamicum has been available until now. With the aim of isolating and characterizing such transcription initiation signals, random Sau3A fragments of C. glutamicum chromosomal DNA and of the corynebacterial phage phi GA1 were cloned into the promoter probe vector pEKplCm and selected for promoter activity by chloramphenicol resistance of transformed C. glutamicum cells. The nucleotide sequence of ten chromosomal and three phage fragments was determined and the transcriptional start (TS) sites were localized by primer extension analyses. Additionally, the promoters of five previously isolated C. glutamicum genes were cloned and mapped. All of the isolated promoters were also functional in the heterologous host Escherichia coli. A comparative analysis of the newly characterized promoter sequences together with published promoters from C. glutamicum revealed conserved sequences centred about 35 bp (ttGcca) and 10 bp (TA.aaT) upstream of the TS site. The position of these motifs and the motifs themselves are comparable to the -35 and -10 promoter consensus sequences of other Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, indicating that they represent transcription initiation signals in C. glutamicum. However, the C. glutamicum consensus hexamer of the -35 region is much less conserved than in E. coli, Bacillus, Lactobacillus and Streptococcus.    A 1H-NMR study of the binding of L-tryptophan to the trp RNA-binding attenuation protein of Bacillus subtilis (TRAP), an ondecamer (91.6 kDa), has been implemented. The assignment of the aromatic indole ring proton resonances of the bound tryptophan ligand has been successfully carried out by two-dimensional chemical exchange experiments. The observation of only a single set of chemical shifts of the bound ligand demonstrates that the tryptophan binding site is identical in all the 11 subunits of the protein. Further, the large change in ligand chemical shifts suggests that the conformation of tryptophan ligand undergoes a significant rearrangement after complex formation with TRAP. This is further substantiated by the extensive ligand-induced chemical shift changes observed to the protein resonances and identification of several strong ligand-protein intermolecular nuclear Overhauser effects. A correlation of these preliminary NMR data with the X-ray crystal structure of the TRAP-tryptophan complex also suggests, tentatively, that the observed changes to the NMR spectra of the protein might correspond to changes associated with residues surrounding the tryptophan binding pocket owing to complex formation.    Deletion of the tetA(L) chromosomal region of Bacillus subtilis in a strain designated JC112 increased the strain&apos;s sensitivity to low tetracycline concentrations. It also resulted in phenotypic changes that correlate with the previously found role of TetA(L) in mediating electrogenic NA+/H+ antiport. Growth of JC112 was impaired relative to that of the wild type at both pH 7.0 and 8.3; Na(+)- and K(+)-dependent pH homeostases were impaired at alkaline pH. The phenotype of JC112 was complemented by plasmid-borne tetA(L) and related tet(K) genes; the antiport activity conferred by the tet(K) gene had an apparently higher preference for K+ over Na+ than that conferred by tetA(L). The data were consistent with TetA(L) being the major Na+(K+)/H+ antiporter involved in pH homeostasis in B. subtilis as well as a significant Na+ extrusion system. The phenotype of JC112 was much more pronounced than that of an earlier transposition mutant, JC111, with a disruption in the putative tetA(L) promoter region. Northern (RNA) blot analysis of tetA(L) RNA from wild-type and JC111 strains revealed the same patterns. That JC111 nevertheless exhibited some Na+ and alkali sensitivity may be accounted for by disruption of regulatory features that, in the wild type, allow increased tetA(L) expression under specific conditions of pH and monovalent cation concentration. Evidence for several different regulatory effects emerged from studies of lacZ expression from the transposon of JC111 and from a tetA(L)-lacZ translational fusion introduced into the amyE locus of wild-type and JC112 strains.    A hallmark of sporulation of Bacillus subtilis is the formation of two distinct cells by an asymmetric division. The development programs in these two cells involve the compartmentalized activities of sigma E in the larger mother cell and of sigma F in the smaller prespore. Activation of sigma E requires expression of the sigma F-directed gene spoIIR. By immunofluorescence microscopy of a strain containing a spoIIR-lacZ fusion, we have shown that spoIIR is transcribed exclusively in the prespore. By placing spoIIR under the control of PspoIIE, it was possible to express spoIIR before the spore septum was formed. Strains containing the PspoIIE-spoIIR construct activated sigma E only in the mother cell in organisms that underwent the asymmetric sporulation division. Thus, compartmentalization of sigma E activity did not require the compartmentalization of spoIIR expression. Nor did the compartmentalization of sigma E require SpoIIAA, SpoIIAB, sigma F, or sigma F-dependent transcription, all of which are required for prespore-specific gene expression. It is inferred that although sigma F and sigma E direct compartmentalized gene expression, neither of these sigma factors, nor the genes under their control, directs the process of compartmentalization.    A transcriptional analysis of the phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C (plcA) gene of Bacillus thuringiensis indicated that its transcription was activated at the onset of the stationary phase in B. thuringiensis but was not activated in B. subtilis. The B. thuringiensis gene encoding a transcriptional activator required for plcA expression was cloned by using a B. subtilis strain carrying a chromosomal plcA&apos;-&apos;lacZ fusion as a heterologous host for selection. This trans activator (designated PlcR) is a protein of a calculated molecular weight of 33,762 which appears to be distantly related to PreL and NprA, regulator proteins enhancing transcription of neutral protease genes during the stationary phase of a Lactobacillus sp. and B. stearothermophilus, respectively. plcR gene transcription was analyzed in B. thuringiensis and in B. subtilis. PlcR positively regulated its own transcription at the onset of the stationary phase. There is a highly conserved DNA sequence (17 bp) 34 nucleotides upstream from the plcR transcriptional start site and 49 nucleotides upstream from the plcA transcriptional start site. As PlcR positively regulates its own transcription and plcA transcription, this conserved DNA sequence may be the specific recognition target for PlcR activation.    In Bacillus subtilis, aryl-beta-glucosides such as salicin and arbutin are catabolized by the gene products of bglP and bglH, encoding an enzyme II of the phosphoenolpyruvate sugar-phosphotransferase system and a phospho-beta-glucosidase, respectively. These two genes are transcribed from a single promoter. The presence of a transcript of about 4,000 nucleotides detected by Northern (RNA) blot analysis indicates that bglP and bglH are part of an operon. However, this transcript is only present when cells are grown in the presence of the inducing substrate, salicin. In the absence of the inducer, a transcript of about 110 nucleotides can be detected, suggesting that transcription terminates downstream of the promoter at a stable termination structure. Initiation of transcription is abolished in the presence of rapidly metabolized carbon sources. Catabolite repression of bglPH expression involves the trans-acting factors CcpA and HPr. In a ccpA mutant, transcription initiation is relieved from glucose repression. Furthermore, we report a catabolite responsive element-CcpA-independent form of catabolite repression requiring the ribonucleic antiterminator-terminator region, which is the target of antitermination, and the wild-type HPr protein of the phosphotransferase system. Evidence that the antitermination protein LicT is a crucial element for this type of regulation is provided.    Sporulation in Bacillus subtilis is a simple developmental system involving the differentiation of two cell types that are formed by an asymmetric cell division. Major changes in the pattern of transcription during sporulation are brought about by the synthesis of new sigma factors (sigma), which are subunits of RNA polymerase that determine promoter specificity. Transcription in the smaller prespore cell type is initiated by a sigma factor called sigma F, the activity of which is subject to tight spatial and temporal control. It is negatively regulated by an anti-sigma factor, SpoIIAB, which is in turn controlled by an anti-anti-sigma factor, SpoIIAA. SpoIIAA and SpoIIAB participate in two contrasting reactions in vitro. In the presence of ATP, the proteins interact transiently and SpoIIAA is inactivated by phosphorylation on a specific serine residue; SpoIIAA then remains free to inhibit sigma F. In the presence of ADP, SpoIIAA binds tightly to SpoIIAB, and sigma F is set free. Release of sigma F activity in vivo might thus be effected by a prespore-specific reduction in the ATP/ADP ratio. Genetic experiments have implicated a fourth protein, called SpoIIE, in this system. It now appears that SpoIIE has two important and independent functions in the establishment of the prespore-specific transcription by sigma F. First it regulates sigma F activity, probably acting as a phosphatase to regenerate the active, non-phosphorylated form of SpoIIAA. Second it controls the formation of the septum that generates the prespore compartment. Combination of these two functions in a single polypeptide may provide a means of coupling gene expression with morphogenesis.    A popular method for the investigation of transcriptional regulation of gene expression is direct measurement of mRNA levels. As an internal control the level of a transcript from a constitutively expressed gene is often determined. To measure the induction rate of stress-responsive genes from Bacillus subtilis the transcript of the constitutively expressed xynA gene was used as a control. But the results presented in this communication prove that the degradation rate of the xynA transcript rises considerably in response to different kinds of stress. This response to stress is not dependent on protein biosynthesis.    Cell-specific activation of the transcription factor sigma F during sporulation in Bacillus subtilis is controlled by a regulatory pathway involving the proteins SpoIIE, SpoIIAA, and SpoIIAB. SpoIIAB is an antagonist of sigma F, and SpoIIAA, which is capable of overcoming SpoIIAB-mediated inhibition of sigma F, is an antagonist of SpoIIAB. SpoIIAA is, in turn, negatively regulated by SpoIIAB, which phosphorylates SpoIIAA on serine 58. SpoIIAA is also positively regulated by SpoIIE, which dephosphorylates SpoIIAA-P, the phosphorylated form of SpoIIAA. Here, isoelectric focusing and Western blot analysis were used to examine the phosphorylation state of SpoIIAA in vivo. SpoIIAA was found to be largely in the phosphorylated state during sporulation in wild-type cells but a significant portion of the protein that was unphosphorylated could also be detected. Consistent with the idea that SpoIIE governs dephosphorylation of SpoIIAA-P, SpoIIAA was entirely in the phosphorylated state in spoIIE mutant cells. Conversely, overexpression of spoIIE led to an increase in the ratio of unphosphorylated SpoIIAA to SpoIIAA-P and caused inappropriate activation of sigma F in the predivisional sporangium. We also show that a mutant form of SpoIIAA (SpoIIAA-S58T) in which serine 58 was replaced with threonine was present exclusively as SpoIIAA-P, a finding that confirms previous biochemical evidence that the mutant protein is an effective substrate for the SpoIIAB kinase but that SpoIIAA-S58T-P cannot be dephosphorylated by SpoIIE. We conclude that SpoIIE plays a crucial role in controlling the phosphorylation state of SpoIIAA during sporulation and thus in governing the cell-specific activation of sigma F.    AbrB is a global transcriptional regulator of many genes that are expressed as Bacillus subtilis exits from active growth into stationary phase and sporulation. Previous results have suggested that binding of abrB at some promoters involves multiple sites of recognition and is a cooperative process. It is shown here that the binding site at spoOE can be subdivided into 5&apos; and 3&apos; halves, each capable of directing AbrB binding. In addition, the central portion of the intact site can promote AbrB binding. Examination of various heterologous and homologous tandem combinations of the half-sites confirms that the native site is a complex array of overlapping suboptimal sites, the precise arrangement of which is required for optimal AbrB binding. Other data suggest that binding of multiple AbrB units is needed for stable complex formation. A binding mechanism involving numerous steps of intermediate affinity is envisioned.    The sigE and sigK genes, encoding the sporulation-specific sigma factors sigma 35 and sigma 28 of Bacillus thuringiensis, were each disrupted by inserting a gene conferring resistance to kanamycin into their coding sequences. The B. thuringiensis SigE- and sigK- mutant strains were blocked at different sporulation stages and were unable to sporulate. The SigE-strain was blocked at stage II of sporulation, whereas the SigK- strain was blocked at stage IV. The expression of a cryIAa&apos;-&apos;lacZ transcriptional fusion was analysed in these genetic backgrounds and it was found that both sigma factors are involved in the in vivo transcription of this gene. However, the SigK- strain harbouring the cryIAa gene produced amounts of toxin similar to those produced by the B. thuringiensis Spo+ strain. The toxins accumulated in the mother cell compartment to form a crystal inclusion which remained encapsulated within the cell wall. Thus, transcription from the sigma E-dependent promoter alone (Bt I promoter) is sufficient to support high levels of toxin production in B. thuringiensis.    Transcription of the lytABC operon was determined by extension of primers on RNAs isolated from strains bearing a deficient sinR gene. A SinR null mutant, in which part of the sinR gene was deleted, exhibits a pattern identical to that characteristic of FlaB (SigD) deficient mutants, i.e., loss of the signal corresponding to the SigD-dependent promoter, but not of that recognized by the SigA form of the RNA polymerase. However, strains bearing either flaD1 or flaD2, two different point mutations of gene sinR, were characterized by a complete loss of signals corresponding to both promoters. Thus, modified FlaD1 and FlaD2 proteins behave like a repressor affecting the expression of lytABC more severely than does the absence of SinR, The most obvious interpretation of this observation is a direct interaction between the SinR protein and the promoters recognized by the SigD form of the RNA polymerase.    In Bacillus subtilis, the major sigma factor, sigma-A (rpoD), and the minor sigma factor, sigma-H (spo0H), are present during growth and are required for the initiation of sporulation. Our experiments indicate that sigma-A and sigma-H compete for binding to core RNA polymerase. We used a fusion of rpoD to the LacI-repressible IPTG-inducible promoter, Pspac, to vary the levels of sigma-A in the cell. Increasing the amount of sigma-A caused a decrease in expression of genes controlled by sigma-H, and a delay in the production of heat-resistant spores. Decreasing the amount of sigma-A, in a strain deleted for the chromosomal rpoD, caused an increase in expression of genes controlled by sigma-H. As rpoD itself is controlled by at least two promoters recognized by RNA polymerase that contains sigma-H, the effect of sigma-A levels on expression of sigma-H-controlled promoters represents a feedback mechanism that might contribute to maintaining appropriate levels of sigma-A. While the level of sigma-A was important for efficient sporulation, our results indicate that the normal transcriptional control of rpoD, in the context of the rpoD operon and the numerous promoters in that operon, is not required for efficient sporulation or germination, provided that the sigma-A level from a heterologous promoter is comparable to that in wild-type cells.    Several crucial genes required for bacterial division lie close together in a region called the dcw cluster. Within the cluster, gene expression is subject to complex transcriptional regulation, which serves to adjust the cell cycle in response to growth rate. The pivotally important FtsZ protein, which is needed to initiate division, is now known to interact with many other components of the division machinery in Escherichia coli. Some biochemical properties of FtsZ, and of another division protein called FtsA, suggest that they are similar to the eukaryotic proteins tubulin and actin respectively. Cell division needs to be closely co-ordinated with chromosome partitioning. The mechanism of partitioning is poorly understood, though several genes involved in this process, including several muk genes, have been identified. The min genes may participate in both septum positioning and chromosome partitioning. Coupled transcription and translation of membrane-associated proteins might also be important for partitioning. In the event of a failure in the normal partitioning process, Bacillus subtilis, at least, has a mechanism for removing a bisected nucleoid from the division septum.    During sporulation in Bacillus subtilis an asymmetric cell division gives rise to unequal progeny called the prepore and the mother cell. Gene expression in the prespore is initiated by cell-specific activation of the transcription factor sigma(F). Three proteins participate in the regulation of sigma(F) activity. The first, SpoIIAB, is an inhibitor of sigma(F), that is, an anti-sigma factor. SpoIIAB is also a protein kinase that catalyzes phosphorylation of the second regulatory protein SpoIIAA (the anti-anti-sigma factor), and thus inactivates it. A third protein, SpoIIE, was shown recently to be able to dephosphorylate SpoIIAA-P in vitro. Here we show that SpoIIE is a bifunctional protein with two critical roles in the establishment of cell fate. First, we confirm by the use of in vivo experiments that it regulates the release of sigma(F) activity by dephosphorylating SpoIIAA-P. Second, we show that SpoIIE is needed for normal formation of the asymmetric septum that separates the prespore from the mother cell. Combination of these two functions in a single polypeptide may serve to couple the release of the cell-specific transcription factors with the formation of the differentiating cells.    Bacillus subtilis, which belongs to Gram-positive eubacteria, has been predicted to have a minor isoleucine tRNA transcribed from the gene possessing the CAT anticodon, which corresponds to methionine. We isolated this tRNA and determined its sequence including modified nucleotides. Modified nucleotide analyses using TLC, UV, and FAB mass spectroscopy revealed that the first letter of the anticodon is modified to lysidine [4-amino-2-(N6-lysino)-1-beta-d-ribofuranosyl pyrimidine]. As a result, this tRNA agrees with the minor one predicted from the DNA sequence and is thought to decode the isoleucine codon AUA.    The sigma B transcription factor of Bacillus subtilis is activated in response to a variety of environmental stresses, including those imposed by entry into the stationary-growth phase, and by heat, salt or ethanol challenge to logarithmically growing cells. Although sigma B is thought to control a general stress regulon, the range of cellular functions it directs remains largely unknown. Our approach to understand the physiological role of sigma B is to characterize genes that require this factor for all or part of their expression, i.e. the csb genes. In this study, we report that the transposon insertion csb40::Tn917lac identifies an operon with three open reading frames, the second of which resembles plant proteins induced by desiccation stress. Primer-extension and operon-fusion experiments showed that the csb40 operon has a sigma B-dependent promoter which is strongly induced by the addition of salt to logarithmically growing cells. The csb40 operon also has a second, sigma H-dependent promoter that is unaffected by salt addition. These results provide support for the hypothesis that sigma B controls a general stress regulon, and indicate that the sigma B and sigma H regulons partly overlap. We suggest that in addition to its acknowledged role in the sporulation process, sigma H is also involved in controlling a subclass of genes that are broadly involved in a general stress response.    Phage phi 29 regulatory protein p4 activates transcription from the late A3 promoter by stabilizing sigma A-RNA polymerase at the promoter as a closed complex. Activation requires interaction between both proteins. Protein p4 bends the DNA upon binding. We have performed a detailed mutagenesis study of the carboxyl end of the protein, which is involved in both transcription activation and DNA bending. The results indicate that Arg-120 is the most critical residue for activation, probably mediating the interaction with RNA polymerase. Several basic residues have been identified, including Arg-120, that contribute to maintenance of the DNA bending, probably via electrostatic interactions with the DNA backbone. The degree or stability of the induced bend apparently relies on the additive contribution of all basic residues of the carboxyl end of the protein. Therefore, the activation and DNA bending surfaces overlap, and Arg-120 should interact with both DNA and RNA polymerase. As we show that protein p4 is a dimer in solution, and is bound to DNA as a tetramer, the results suggest a model in which two of the p4 subunits interact with the DNA, bending it, while the other two subunits remain accessible to interact with RNA polymerase.    Purified Bacillus subtilis GlnR was shown to bind with high affinity to a specific region that overlaps with the glnRA promoter site. The GlnR binding site includes four copies of a repeated sequence that may be the recognition site for the protein. GlnR inhibited transcription from the glnRA promoter in vitro.    A transcriptional attenuation mechanism for the regulation of pyr operon expression in Bacillus subtilis in which the PyrR regulatory protein binds pyr mRNA at three sites with similar sequences to cause transcription termination in response to elevated pyrimidine nucleotide pools has been proposed (R. J. Turner, Y. Lu, and R. L. Switzer, J. Bacteriol. 176:3708-3722, 1994). Twenty-seven mutants with cis-acting defects in the repression by pyrimidines of beta-galactosidase expression of a pyr-lacZ fusion-integrant were isolated as blue colonies on X-Gal (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-beta-D-galactopyranoside) agar plates containing uracil and uridine after UV irradiation or treatment with mutagens or following mutD mutagenesis. These mutants showed normal repression of the chromosomal pyr operon by exogenous pyrimidines. Sequence analysis revealed 12 unique sites of mutation, which occurred in the conserved putative PyrR binding sequence (10 of the 12) or in the stem of the transcriptional terminator structure. These mutants strongly support the proposed model for regulation of the pyr operon.    We have cloned and sequenced the promoter-proximal region of the Bacillus subtilis operon containing the pbpB gene, encoding essential penicillin-binding protein PBP2B. The first two genes in the operon, designated yllB and yllC, are significantly similar to genes of unknown function similarly positioned upstream of pbpB in Escherichia coli. Both B. subtilis genes are shown to be nonessential. The third B. subtilis gene, yllD, is essential, as is the correspondingly positioned ftsL gene of E. coli. The predicted product of yllD is similar to FtsL in size and distribution of charged residues but is not significantly related in primary amino acid sequence. The major promoter for the cluster lies upstream of the first gene, yllB, but at least one minor promoter lies within the yllC gene. The operon is transcribed throughout growth at a low level.    Analysis of the pH decrease and 3-phosphoglyceric acid (3PGA) accumulation in the forespore compartment of sporulating cells of Bacillus subtilis showed that the pH decrease of 1 to 1.2 units at approximately 4 h of sporulation preceded 3PGA accumulation, as observed previously in B. megaterium. These data, as well as analysis of the forespore pH decrease in asporogenous mutants of B. subtilis, indicated that sigma G-dependent forespore transcription, but not sigma K-dependent mother cell transcription, is required for the forespore pH decrease. Further analysis of these asporogenous mutants showed an excellent correlation between the forespore pH decrease and the forespore&apos;s accumulation of 3PGA. These latter results are consistent with our previous suggestion that the decrease in forespore pH results in greatly decreased activity of phosphoglycerate mutase in the forespore, which in turn leads to 3PGA accumulation. In further support of this suggestion, we found that (i) elevating the pH of developing forespores of B. megaterium resulted in rapid utilization of the forespore&apos;s 3PGA depot and (ii) increasing forespore levels of PGM approximately 10-fold in B. subtilis resulted in a large decrease in the spore&apos;s depot of 3PGA. The B. subtilis strain with a high phosphoglycerate mutase level sporulated, and the spores germinated and went through outgrowth normally, indicating that forespore accumulation of a large 3PGA depot is not essential for these processes.    Regulation of the ilv-leu operon probably involves interaction of a tR NA(GAG) with leader region mRNA. Conversion of a CUC (Leu) triplet located within the leader region to UUC (Phe), CGC (Arg), or UAC (Tyr) converted reporter gene expression to control by corresponding amino acids. Conversion of the CUC triplet to CUU (Leu) decreased expression and disrupted regulation. The results suggested that other tRNAs can substitute for tRNA(Leu) but that interactions in addition to pairing of the anticodon with the CUC triplet are important for proper control.    Gene licS of Bacillus subtilis encodes an excreted Beta-1,3-1,4-endoglucanase necessary for lichenan utilization. Upstream of licS we found a gene (termed licT) together with its promoter which encodes a transcriptional antiterminator of the BglG family. Genes licT and licS are separated by a palindromic sequence (lic-t) reminiscent of transcriptional terminators recognized by the antiterminator proteins of the BglG family. The LicT protein can prevent termination at terminator lic-t and also at terminator t2 of the Escherichia coli bgl operon and BglG prevents termination at lic-t. The role of LicT in licS regulation by preventing termination at its terminator lic-t appears to be limited since expression of licS is inducible only two- to threefold. This limited regulation is mainly due to a high basal level of licS expression which can in part be attributed to the presence of a second promoter preceding licS and located downstream of lic-t. However, disruption of gene licT leads not only to loss of inducibility of licS but also to loss of growth on lichenan or on its degradation products, indicating its stringent role in beta-glucan utilization.    The gene which encodes transcription termination factor Rho from Rhodobacter sphaeroides 2.4.1, the gram-negative facultative photosynthetic bacterium, has been cloned and sequenced. The deduced protein shows a high level of sequence similarity to other bacterial Rho factors, especially those from proteobacteria. However, several amino acid substitutions in the conserved ATP-binding site have been identified. When expressed in Escherichia coli, the R. sphaeroides rho gene relieves Rho-dependent polarity of the trp operon, indicating interference with the transcription termination machinery of E. coli. A truncated version of R. sphaeroides Rho (Rho&apos;) is toxic to a bacterium related to R. sphaeroides, Paracoccus denitrificans, and is lethal to R. sphaeroides. We suggest that toxicity is due to the ability of Rho&apos; to form inactive heteromers with the chromosomally encoded intact Rho. We localized a minimal amino acid sequence within Rho which appears to be critical for its toxic effect and which we believe may be involved in protein-protein interactions. This region was previously reported to be highly conserved and unique among various Rho proteins. The lethality of rho&apos; in R. sphaeroides together with our inability to obtain a null mutation in rho suggests that Rho-dependent transcription termination is essential in R. sphaeroides. This is analogous to what is observed for gram-negative E. coli and contrasts with what is observed for gram-positive Bacillus subtilis. The genetic region surrounding the R. sphaeroides rho gene has been determined and found to be different compared with those of other bacterial species. rho is preceded by orf1, which encodes a putative integral membrane protein possibly involved in cytochrome formation or functioning. The gene downstream of rho is homologous to thdF, whose product is involved in thiophene and furan oxidation.    The Pho regulon of Bacillus subtilis is controlled by three two-component signal-transduction systems: PhoP/PhoR, ResD/ResE, and the phosphorelay leading to the phosphorylation of SpoOA. Two of these systems act as positive regulators, while the third is involved in negative regulation of the Pho regulon. Under phosphate-starvation-induction conditions, the response regulator (RR) PhoP, and the histidine protein kinase (HK) PhoR, are involved in the induction of Pho-regulon genes including the phoPR operon and genes encoding the major vegetative alkaline phosphatases, phoA and phoB. ResD (the RR) and ResE (the HK) are positive regulators of both aerobic and anaerobic respiration in B. subtilis. Current data suggest that they are also positive regulators of the Pho regulon, as is the transition-state regulatory protein AbrB. Data presented reveal that ResDE and AbrB are involved in activation of the Pho regulon through separate regulatory pathways. SpoOA approximately P (RR) exerts a negative effect on the Pho regulon through its repression of AbrB, and possibly through repression of ResDE. Both pathways converge to regulate transcription of the phoPR operon.    Functioning of the spoIIE locus of Bacillus subtilis is required for formation of a normal polar septum during sporulation and for activation of the transcription factor sigma F, which directs early forespore-specific gene expression. We have determined the DNA sequence of the wild type and several mutant alleles of the spoIIE gene of B. subtilis and sequenced a substantial portion of its presumptive homologue in Bacillus megaterium. We show that the spoIIE locus encodes a single large protein with a predicted molecular mass of 92 kDa. Each of five point-mutation alleles, which have traditionally defined the locus, and two transposon-generated mutations were shown to fall within the coding sequence for the 92 kDa gene product or within sequences expected to be required for its expression. The amino-terminal portion of the predicted SpoIIE gene product, comprising approximately 40% of the protein, is extremely hydrophobic and is expected to contain up to 12 membrane-spanning segments. The remainder of the protein contains no hydrophobic segments long enough to span a lipid bilayer and is therefore presumed to comprise one or more globular, aqueous-phase exposed domains. An in-frame fusion joining the 3&apos; end of the B. megaterium spoIIE coding sequence to the 5&apos; end of gfp, a gene encoding the green fluorescent protein (GFP) of Aquorea victoria, resulted in a strong, sporulation-specific fluorescent signal localized to the sites of sporulation septum assembly. We speculate that SpoIIE plays a role in assembling the sporulation septum, perhaps determining the special properties of the structure that permit intercompartment signalling during development.    Bacteria use two-component signal transduction systems to sense and respond to their environment. A sensor kinase and a response-regulator transcription factor work in concert by phosphorylation/dephosphorylation through kinase and phosphatase activities to maintain a level of phosphorylated response regulator commensurate with the level of signal input. Signal input can be accommodated through stimulation of the kinase activity or the phosphatase activity of the two-component system. With some notable exceptions, the sensor kinases recognize a single stimulatory ligand. A new dimension in the regulation of two-component signal transduction systems was discovered in the Rap phosphatases which dephosphorylate the SpoOF response-regulator of Bacillus subtilis independent of the sensor kinases. This family of phosphatases is encoded by at least six chromosomal genes. Although not all of the phosphatases of the family have activity on phosphorylated SpoOF, the two best-characterized members, RapA and RapB, prevent sporulation by dephosphorylating this response regulator component of the phosphorelay. Phosphatase activity of RapA is regulated by a gene, phrA, in the same transcriptional unit, that encodes a peptide secreted from the cell which may serve as a quorum sensor. Most of the Rap phosphatase operons have a gene coding for a protein with some similarity to PhrA in their transcription units, but it is uncertain whether all of these play a role in regulation. The Rap phosphatases are postulated to be a mechanism for allowing signals other than those that affect the sensor kinases to regulate the signal transduction pathway. They may have been recruited to help regulate sporulation because the multiple signals regulating this process may outstrip the recognition capacity of the kinases.    Two Bacillus subtilis genes, designated resD and resE, encode proteins that are similar to those of two-component signal transduction systems and play a regulatory role in respiration. The overlapping resD-resE genes are transcribed during vegetative growth from a very weak promoter directly upstream of resD. They are also part of a larger operon that includes three upstream genes, resABC (formerly orfX14, -15, and -16), the expression of which is strongly induced postexponentially. ResD is required for the expression of the following genes: resA, ctaA (required for heme A synthesis), and the petCBD operon (encoding subunits of the cytochrome bf complex). The resABC genes are essential genes which encode products with similarity to cytochrome c biogenesis proteins. resD null mutations are more deleterious to the cell than those of resE. resD mutant phenotypes, directly related to respiratory function, include streptomycin resistance, lack of production of aa3 or caa3 terminal oxidases, acid accumulation when grown with glucose as a carbon source, and loss of ability to grow anaerobically on a medium containing nitrate. A resD mutation also affected sporulation, carbon source utilization, and Pho regulon regulation. The data presented here support an activation role for ResD, and to a lesser extent ResE, in global regulation of aerobic and anaerobic respiration i B.subtilis.    Sporulation in Bacillus subtilis is dependent on the response regulator Spo0A, which both represses and activates transcription in vitro. The activity of Spo0A is increased by phosphorylation. We previously demonstrated that the phosphorylation increased the ability of Spo0A to stimulate in vivo transcription from the promoter for the spoIIG operon, one of the operons known to be regulated by Spo0A in vivo. In the work reported here we have examined the kinetics of transcription initiation at the spoIIG operon promoter using a single round transcription assay and the kinetics of formation of spoIIG promoter-RNA polymerase complexes using DNase I footprinting. Both the kinetic assays and the footprint assays indicated that the initial binding of the polymerase to the template was not dependent on the presence of Spo0A. The phosphorylated form of Spo0A stimulated the rate of initiation by affecting a step that occurred after the initial interaction of the polymerase with the template. Phosphorylation of Spo0A may stimulate transcription by modifying preinitiation complexes containing the polymerase and the promoter.    The initiation of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis is under control of the transcriptional factor Spo0A. Most Spo0A mutants fail to initiate the sporulation process and all the sporulation initiated processes such as the synthesis of subtilisin. However, the product of spo0A9V, one of the several spo0A mutants characterized, distinguishes itself in the fact that, while it appears to effectively repress abrB, it fails to activate the spoIIA operon. The aim of this study was to examine the effect of the spo0A9V mutation on aprE expression and we found that in different genetic backgrounds, the spo0A9V mutation has a negative effect on aprE::lacZ expression.    Inactivation of Bacillus subtilis orf1177 in an otherwise Rec+ strain reduced genetic exchange and DNA repair. When the mutation was transferred into a set of recombination-deficient and repair-deficient strains, the DNA repair and recombination ability of the double or triple mutant strains was drastically reduced. B. subtilis Orf1177 protein shares substantial homology with the Escherichia coli Mdf, RecG and UvrB proteins. In vivo analysis of UV-induced mutations suggests that Orf1177 is necessary for strand-specific DNA repair, as is the case for the E. coli MFD protein. Therefore, orf1177 and Orf1177 were termed mfd gene and Mfd protein, respectively. The purified Mfd protein has a native molecular mass of 140 kDa (expected molecular mass 133 kDa). The Mfd protein is a sequence-independent DNA binding protein with weak ATPase activity. The Mfd protein was able to displace in vitro B. subtilis or E. coli RNA polymerase stalled at a lesion. Therefore, Mfd protein appears to target the transcribed strand for repair by recognizing a stalled RNA polymerase and dissociating it from the DNA. In addition, the strong recombination-deficient phenotype of mfd- rec- strains suggest that Mfd protein is involved in homologous DNA recombination.    The 5&apos; region of the human lysozyme gene from -3500 to +25 was fused to a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter gene and three transgenic founder mice were obtained. All three transgenic lines showed the same pattern of CAT enzyme expression in adult mouse tissues that was consistent with the targeting of elicited, activated macrophages in tissues and developing and elicited granulocytes. In normal mice high CAT enzyme activity was found in the spleen, lung, and thymus, tissues rich in phagocytically active cells, but not in many other tissues, such as the gut and muscle, which contain resident macrophages. Cultured resident peritoneal macrophages and cells elicited 18 hr (granulocytes) and 4 days (macrophages) after injection of sterile thioglycollate broth expressed CAT activity. Bacillus Calmette-Guerin infection of transgenic mice resulted in CAT enzyme expression in the liver, which contained macrophage-rich granulomas, whereas the liver of uninfected mice did not have any detectable CAT enzyme activity. Although the Paneth cells of the small intestine in both human and mouse produce lysozyme, the CAT gene, under the control of the human lysozyme promoter, was not expressed in the mouse small intestine. These results indicate that the human lysozyme promoter region may be used to direct expression of genes to activated mouse myeloid cells.    Entry into sporulation by the Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis is governed by two transcription factors, Spo0A and sigma H, and involves a switch in the site of division from a medial to a polar location. We report that at the onset of sporulation, assembly of the cell division protein FtsZ shifts from midcell to potential division sites near both poles. The switch to a bipolar pattern of FtsZ localization is dependent on Spo0A. Additionally, synthesis of an activated form of Spo0A during growth artificially activates the switch in FtsZ localization and results in the formation of polar septa. The sigma H factor, on the other hand, is dispensable for the switch in the position of the FtsZ assembly site, although it is required for formation of the polar septum. Our results suggest that during the transition from growth to sporulation, Spo0A induces the expression of genes that suppress FtsZ assembly at the midcell site and activate sites at both poles, whereas sigma H induces genes required for a subsequent step in cytokinesis.    The Bacillus subtilis global regulator AbrB is a DNA-binding protein composed of six identical monomers of 96 amino acids that shows specificity to the promoter regions of its target genes including its own. We have sequenced thirteen previously uncharacterized abrB mutations. Four mutant AbrB proteins were purified, and their DNA-binding properties and multimeric structures were examined. AbrB23 (R25S) had no appreciable DNA binding activity but retained a hexameric structure, indicating that Arg25 is important in DNA interactions. Three other mutant proteins, AbrB1 (C56Y), AbrB19 (Gln83--&gt;termination codon), and AbrB100 (L69P), showed decreased DNA binding and altered multimeric interactions. Analysis of the expression and AbrB binding affinities of mutant abrB promoters demonstrated that a consensus -35 region is incompatible with proper autoregulation of the abrB gene.    Results currently available clearly indicate that the metabolite-activated protein kinase-mediated phosphorylation of Ser-46 in HPr plays a key role in catabolite repression and the control of inducer levels in low-GC Gram-positive bacteria. This protein kinase is not found in enteric bacteria such as E. coli and Salmonella typhimurium where an entirely different PTS-mediated regulatory mechanism is responsible for catabolite repression and inducer concentration control. In Table 2 these two mechanistically dissimilar but functionally related processes are compared (Saier et al., 1995b). In Gram-negative enteric bacteria, an external sugar is sensed by the sugar-recognition constituent of an Enzyme II complex of the PTS (IIC), and a dephosphorylating signal is transmitted via the Enzyme IIB/HPr proteins to the central regulatory protein, IIAGlc. Targets regulated include (1) permeases specific for lactose, maltose, melibiose and raffinose, (2) catabolic enzymes such as glycerol kinase that generate cytoplasmic inducers, and (3) the cAMP biosynthetic enzyme, adenylate cyclase that mediates catabolite repression (Saier, 1989, 1993). In low-GC Gram-positive bacteria, cytoplasmic phosphorylated sugar metabolites are sensed by the HPr kinase which is allostericlaly activated. HPr becomes phosphorylated on Ser-46, and this phosphorylated derivative regulates the activities of its target proteins. These targets include (1) the PTS, (2) non-PTS permeases (both of which are inhibited) and (3) a cytoplasmic sugar-P phosphatase which is activated to reduce cytoplasmic inducer levels. Other important targets of HPr(ser-P) action are (4) the CcpA protein and probably (5) the CepB transcription factor. These two proteins together are believed to determine the intensity of catabolite repression. Their relative importance depends on physiological conditions. Both proteins may respond to the cytoplasmic concentration of HPr(ser-P) and appropriate metabolites. CepA possibly binds sugar metabolites such as FBP as well as HPr(ser-P). Because HPr(his-P, ser-P) does not bind to CepA, the regulatory cascade is also sensitive to the external PTS sugar concentration. Mutational analyses (unpublished results) suggest that CepA may bind to a site that includes His-15. Interestingly, both the CepA protein in the Gram-positive bacterium, B. subtilis, and glycerol kinase in the Gram-negative bacterium, E. coli, sense both a PTS protein and a cytoplasmic metabolic intermediate. The same may be true of target permeases and enzymes in both types of organisms, but this possibility has not yet been tested. The parallels between the Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacterial regulatory systems are superficial at the mechanistic level but fundamental at the functional level. Thus, the PTS participates in regulation in both cases, and phosphorylation of its protein constituents plays key roles. However, the stimuli sensed, the transmission mechanisms, the central PTS regulatory proteins that effect allosteric regulation, and some of the target proteins are completely different. It seems clear that these two transmission mechanisms evolved independently. They provide a prime example of functional convergence.    The gene designated pepR1, encoding a potential transcription regulator of Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. lactis DSM7290, was identified by sequence similarity of an open reading frame located upstream of the prolidase pepQ orientated in opposite direction. pepQ and pepR1 coding regions are spaced by 152 nucleotides. Upstream of the -35 region of pepQ, a 14-bp palindromic sequence, homologous to the catabolite responsive element, could be identified. The pepRl gene has the potential to encode a protein of 333 amino acids with a calculated molecular mass of 36955 Da and a calculated pl of 5.5. The deduced protein sequence shows significant identity to the catabolite control protein of Bacillus. Co-expression in Escherichia coli was studied with the pepR1-pepQ intergenic region fused to the promoterless beta-galactosidase reporter gene. The pepQ-beta-galactosidase hybrid displayed an enhanced expression in the presence of cloned pepR1.    Asymmetric cell division generates two cells that contain different regulatory proteins and express different fates. In an example of asymmetric cell division from B. subtilis, a site on the membrane of the dividing cell is chosen to establish the initial asymmetry. Recent results show that a key regulatory protein, SpoIIE, is localized to one side of a sporulating B. subtilis cell, and subsequently functions in an asymmetric manner. SpoIIE is a phosphatase at the beginning of a regulatory cascade that leads to activation of a cell fate-determining transcription factor in only one daughter cell.    The induction of stress proteins is an important component of the adaptional network of a non-growing cell of Bacillus subtilis. A diverse range of stresses such as heat shock, salt stress, ethanol, starvation for oxygen or nutrients etc. induce the same set of proteins, called general stress proteins. Although the adaptive functions of these proteins are largely unknown, they are proposed to provide general and rather non-specific protection of the cell under these adverse conditions. In addition to these non-specific general stress proteins, all extracellular signals induce a set of specific stress proteins that may confer specific protection against a particular stress factor. In B. subtilis at least three different classes of heat-inducible genes can be defined by their common regulatory characteristics: Class I genes, as exemplified by the dnaK and groE operons, are most efficiently induced by heat stress. Their expression involves a sigma A-dependent promoter, an inverted repeat (called the CIRCE element) highly conserved among eubacteria, and probably a repressor interacting with the CIRCE element. The majority of general stress genes (class II, more than 40) are induced at sigma B-dependent promoters by different growth-inhibiting conditions. The activation of sigma B by stress or starvation is the crucial event in the induction of this large stress regulon. Only a few genes, including Ion, clpC, clpP, and ftsH, can respond to different stress factors independently of sigma B or CIRCE (class III). Stress induction of these genes occurs at promoters presumably recognized by sigma A and probably involves additional regulatory elements which remain to be defined.    Sigma-factor F (sigmaF) is a key transcription factor that initiates prespore development in Bacillus subtilis. Its activity is controlled by an anti-sigma factor, SpoIIAB, which is also a protein kinase that phosphorylates the anti-anti-sigma factor SpoIIAA. We have examined our earlier prediction that SpoIIAA must undergo a major change in its properties when phosphorylated. Upon gel filtration in the presence of ADP, SpoIIAA-P was eluted from a Superdex column much later than SpoIIAB, whereas SpoIIAA was coeluted with SpoIIAB, indicating the formation of a protein/protein complex. The complex contained ADP, and had two monomers of SpoIIAA to each SpoIIAB dimer. Its dissociation constant was 13 mu M. Gel permeation on high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) suggested an apparent molecular mass for SpoIIAA-P which was much higher (23.5 kDa) than that of SpoIIAA (15.8 kDa), but Ferguson plots showed that SpoIIAA-P was not a phosphorylated dimer of SpoIIAA. Our tentative conclusion, that SpoIIAA and SpoIIAA-P differ markedly in conformation, was confirmed by the results of partial digestion with chymotrypsin.    Heat-shock regulation was detected for three out of the five members of the groESL multigene family in Bradyrhizobium japonicum. The results uncovered the simultaneous presence of two distinct heat-shock control systems which so far have not been reported to co-exist in a single prokaryotic organism. The first system concerns groESL1 whose transcription is controlled in a sigma32-dependent manner similar to that known from work done with Escherichia coli. Heat-shock control of groESL4 is mediated by the second system, which is characterized by an inverted-repeat DNA structure originally described as a heat-shock regulatory element (CIRCE) in Bacillus subtilis. This element represses expression of groESL4 under non-stress conditions, as inferred from the increased expression of a groESL4&apos;-&apos;lacZ fusion suffering a 4 bp deletion within the CIRCE element. The two control systems clearly differ with respect to the temperature dependence and the kinetics of the heat-shock response, and they also respond differently to the stress signal elicited by incorporation of the amino acid analogue p-F-phenylalanine into cellular protein. Knock-out mutations in groEL4 resulted in an increased expression of groESL4, suggesting that repression via CIRCE depends, itself, upon the cellular level of GroEL4 protein.    The three commonly found RNA-binding domains, the ribonucleoprotein (RNP) domain, the double stranded RNA binding domain (dsRBD) and the K homology (KH) domain, have now been shown to have an alpha/beta fold similar to that found in many ribosomal proteins. Crystal structures of two hairpin RNA-protein complexes have been determined recently: the U1A spliceosomal protein bound to hairpin II of U1 small nuclear RNA, and MS2 bacteriophage capsid protein bound to a hairpin present at the ribosomal binding site of MS2 replicase mRNA. The crystal structure of the tryptophan operon RNA binding attenuation protein from Bacillus subtilis shows a novel structure with 11 monomers arranged in a doughnut-shaped ring that binds 11 copies of (U/G)AG triplets presented in the leader sequence of the tryptophan operon polycistronic message.    The initiation of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis is dependent on the phosphorylation of the Spo0A transcription factor mediated by the phosphorelay and by two major kinases, KinA and KinB. Temporal expression of these kinases was analyzed, and an assessment of their respective contributions to the production of Spo0A-P was undertaken. The results show that KinB is expressed and activated prior to KinA; i.e., the two kinases are solicited sequentially in the sporulation process and are thought to be activated by different signaling pathways. A strategy was developed to isolate mutations specifically affecting the KinB pathway, using the newly improved mini-Tn10 delivery vector pIC333. Several mutants were obtained, one of which carried a transposon in a gene coding for a small integral membrane protein, named KbaA. Inactivation of the kbaA gene appeared to affect KinB activity but not transcription of kinB. A Spo+ suppressor (kinB45) of the kbaA null mutation was isolated in the promoter region of kinB. An eightfold increase of kinB expression levels over wild-type levels was observed in the kinB45 mutant. Thus, overexpression of the kinB-kapB operon was sufficient to overcome the sporulation defect caused by inactivation of kbaA in a KinA- strain. Transcription of kinB was found to be repressed by SinR, while the kinB45 mutant was no longer sensitive to SinR regulation. Implications of these observations on the transcriptional regulation of kinB and the role of KbaA in KinB activation are discussed.    Whereas in Escherichia coli only one heat shock regulon is transiently induced by mild heat stress, for Bacillus subtilis three classes of heat shock genes regulated by different mechanisms have been described. Regulation of class I heat shock genes (dnaK and groE operons) involves an inverted repeat (CIRCE element) which most probably serves as an operator for a repressor. Here, we report on the analyses of an hrcA null mutant (delta hrcA), in which hrcA, the first gene of the dnaK operon, was deleted from the B. subtilis chromosome. This strain was perfectly viable at low and high temperatures. Transcriptional analysis of the deletion mutant revealed a high level of constitutive expression of both the dnaK and groE operons even at a low temperature. A further increase in the amount of groE transcript was observed after temperature upshift, suggesting a second induction mechanism for this operon. Overproduction of HrcA protein from a second copy of hrcA derived from a plasmid (phrcA+) in B. subtilis wild-type and delta hrcA strains prevented heat shock induction of the dnaK and groE operons at the level of transcription almost completely and strongly reduced the amounts of mRNA at a low temperature as well. Whereas the wild-type strain needed 4 h to resume growth after temperature upshift, the delta hrcA strain stopped growth only for about 1 h. Overproduction of HrcA protein prior to a heat shock almost completely prevented growth at a high temperature. These data clearly demonstrate that the hrcA product serves as a negative regulator of class I heat shock genes.    Bacillus subtilis has duplicate isochorismate synthase genes, menF and dhbC. Isochorismate synthase is involved in the biosynthesis of both the respiratory chain component menaquinone (MK) and the siderophore 2,3-dihydroxybenzoate (DHB). Several menF and dhbC deletion mutants were constructed to identify the contribution made by each gene product to MK and DHB biosynthesis. menF deletion mutants were able to produce wild-type levels of MK and DHB, suggesting that the dhbC gene product is able to compensate for the lack of MenF. However, a dhbC deletion mutant produced wild-type levels of MK but was DHB deficient, indicating that MenF is unable to compensate for the lack of DhbC. A menF dhbC double-deletion mutant was both MK and DHB deficient. Transcription analysis showed that expression of dhbC, but not of menF, is regulated by iron concentration. A dhbA&apos;::lacZ fusion strain was constructed to examine the effects of mutations to the iron box sequence within the dhb promoter region. These mutations abolished the iron-regulated transcription of the dhb genes, suggesting that a Fur-like repressor protein exists in B. subtilis.    The Bacillus subtilis men genes encode biosynthetic enzymes for formation of the respiratory chain component menaquinone. The menp1 promoter previously was shown to be the primary cis element for menFD gene expression. In the present work, it was found that either supplementation with nonfermentable carbon sources or reutilization of glycolytic end products increased menp1 activity in the late postexponential phase. The effect on menp1 activity by a particular end product (such as acetoin or acetate) was prevented by blocking the corresponding pathway for end product utilization. Alteration of a TGAAA motif within the promoter region resulted in unregulated menp1 activity throughout the culture cycle, irrespective of the carbon source added.    The main regulator of pIP501 replication is an antisense RNA (RNAIII) that induces transcriptional attenuation of the essential RNAII. Previous studies identified the termination point in vivo and demonstrated attenuation in vitro. This in vivo analysis confirms the appearance of attenuated RNAII dependent on RNAIII. Half-lives and intracellular levels of RNAII and RNAIII were determined: in a Bacillus subtilis cell harboring a wild-type pIP501 plasmid, approximately 50 molecules RNAII and 1000 to 2000 molecules of RNAIII were measured, respectively. The half-life of RNAII was in the range of that of other target RNAs, whereas that of RNAIII (approximately 30 minutes) was unusually long, representing a so far unprecedented case of a metabolically stable antisense RNA regulating plasmid copy number. Long antisense RNA half-life is predicted to yield sluggish control and instability of maintenance. We propose a model for how plasmid pIP501 may avoid this problem by using both the repressor CopR and the antisense RNAIII for control. Four stem-loop mutants of RNAII/RNAIII with elevated copy numbers were characterized for in vitro antisense/target RNA binding, RNAIII half-life, incompatibility, and attenuation in vivo. Two classes were found: interaction mutants and half-life mutants. The former suggest a key function for loop LIII of RNAIII as recognition loop in the primary steps of RNAII/RNAIII interaction.    Phage phi29 regulatory protein p4 activates transcription from the late A3 promoter and represses the main early promoters, named A2b and A2c. Activation involves stabilization of RNA polymerase (RNAP) at the A3 promoter as a closed complex and is mediated by interaction between RNAP and a small domain of protein p4 in which residue Arg120 plays an essential role. We show that protein p4 represses the A2c promoter by binding to DNA immediately upstream from RNAP in a way that does not hinder RNAP binding; rather, the two proteins bind cooperatively to DNA. In the presence of protein p4, RNAP can form an initiated complex at the A2c promoter that generates short abortive transcripts, but cannot leave the promoter. Mutation of protein p4 residue Arg120, which relieves the contact between the two proteins, leads to a loss of repression. Therefore, the contact between protein p4 and RNAP through the protein p4 domain containing Arg120 can activate or repress transcription, depending on the promoter. The relative position of protein p4 and RNAP, which is different at each promoter, together with the distinct characteristics of the two promoters, may determine whether protein p4 activates or represses transcription.    The transcription factor SinR, a pleiotropic regulator of late growth processes in Bacillus subtilis, has been crystallised as a complex with its antagonist SinI, in a form suitable for structural analysis. The SinI:SinR crystals diffract X-rays generated from a rotating copper anode source to 2.3 A spacing and a complete native dataset has been collected to this resolution limit. The space group of the crystals is P3(1)21 (or its enantiomorph P3(2)21) with cell dimensions a = b = 60.76 A, c = 87.79 A. Assuming that there is a single SinI:SinR heterodimer in the asymmetric unit, the crystals have a Vm of 2.53 A3.Da-1.    A variety of transcription attenuation mechanisms are used by bacteria to regulate gene and operon expression. This review summarizes previous and current studies designed to elucidate the features of the specific attenuation mechanisms that regulate expression of the tryptophanase (tna) operon of Escherichia coli and the tryptophan (trp) operon of Bacillus subtilis. Initiation of transcription in the tna operon is regulated by catabolite repression. Once initiated, transcription is regulated by tryptophan-induced inhibition of Rho-mediated transcription termination in the leader region of the operon. An operon-encoded leader peptide, TnaC, containing a crucial tryptophan residue, plays an essential role in induction. This peptide appears to act in cis on the ribosome translating tnaC to inhibit its release at the tnaC stop codon. The stalled ribosome would block Rho&apos;s access to the tna transcript, thereby preventing termination. Transcription of the trp operon of B subtilis is regulated by an attenuation mechanism that responds to a tryptophan-activated eleven subunit RNA-binding regulatory protein, called TRAP. Activated TRAP binds to repeated GAG sequences in the leader segment of the trp operon transcript, disrupting an RNA antiterminator and promoting formation of a terminator. Activated TRAP also regulates translation of trpG in the folate operon by binding to repeat GAG sequences surrounding the trpG ribosome binding site. A temperature sensitive tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase (trpS) mutant was previously observed to overexpress the trp operon and trpG, when grown at elevated temperatures in the presence of tryptophan. We have found that the trpS defect increases trp operon and trpG expression by interfering with TRAP&apos;s ability to act. We suggest that either accumulation of uncharged tRNA(Trp) or overproduction of a TRAP-binding transcript reduces the level of functional TRAP in the trpS mutant.    The process of sporulation in the bacterium Bacillus subtilis proceeds through a well-defined series of morphological stages that involve the conversion of a growing cell into a two-cell-chamber sporangium within which a spore is produced. Over 125 genes are involved in this process, the transcription of which is temporally and spatially controlled by four DNA-binding proteins and five RNA polymerase sigma factors. Through a combination of genetic, biochemical, and cell biological approaches, regulatory networks have been elucidated that explicitly link the activation of these sigma factors to landmark events in the course of morphogenesis and to each other through pathways of intercellular communication. Signals targeting proteins to specific subcellular localizations and governing the assembly of macromolecular structures have been uncovered but their nature remains to be determined.    In this review, we summarize progress on the regulation of the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase genes in Bacillus subtilis. Most of the genes encoding this set of enzymes in B subtilis are members of a large family of Gram-positive genes and operons controlled by a novel antitermination mechanism that uses their cognate uncharged tRNA as the effector. A subset of these genes is, in addition, likely to be controlled at the level of mRNA processing and degradation. We describe the key experiments leading to these conclusions.    The Bacillus subtilis glpD gene encodes glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. This gene is preceded by a leader region containing an inverted repeat which acts as a transcription terminator. Expression of glpD is controlled by antitermination of transcription at the inverted repeat. Antitermination is effected by the glpP gene product in conjunction with glycerol-3-phosphate and, consequently, GlpP mutants fail to grow on glycerol as a sole carbon and energy source. We have isolated a number of glycerol-positive revertants of GlpP mutants. Most of these revertants have mutations in the inverted repeat of the glpD leader and produce glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase constitutively. Unlike wild-type bacteria, they are not sensitive to glucose repression of glpD. A few of the revertants are temperature sensitive, i.e. they grow on glycerol at 32 degrees C but not at 45 degrees C and produce glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase only at 32 degrees C. Northern blot analyses demonstrated that the temperature-sensitive expression of glpD is due to destabilization of glpD mRNA. Furthermore, introduction of the wild-type glpP gene into the revertants stabilized the glpD mRNA. This is probably a result of a direct interaction between the GlpP protein and the leader of glpD mRNA. Besides its function in antitermination of transcription of glpD, it is suggested that GlpP is also involved in controlling glpD mRNA stability. Introduction of the glpP gene into the revertants also restored glucose repression, indicating that this repression is mediated by the GlpP protein.    The AbrB protein of Bacillus subtilis regulates expression of numerous genes, primarily through specific binding interactions to DNA regions containing transcriptional promoters. Although over 15 target regions for AbrB binding to chromosomally located sequences have been analysed by DNase I footprinting, no obvious consensus sequence or motif has yet emerged from their examination. Using in vitro selection techniques, we have isolated optimal AbrB-binding sites from oligonucleotides containing 22 or 44 random base pairs. The best of these sites have an apparent in vitro Kd which is fivefold lower than a similar-sized DNA fragment containing the sequence corresponding to the AbrB-binding site on the spo0E gene. We tested one of the sites in vivo and found that it confers AbrB-mediated control upon a promoter not normally regulated by AbrB. In each of four separate trials, the selected sites possess motifs that converge to a simple consensus. It is argued that the nature and spacing of these motifs produce a type of three-dimensional DNA structure recognizable by AbrB, and that known in vivo sites, which lack these motifs, possess an approximation of the optimal structural determinant.    Azoxybacilin, produced by Bacillus cereus, has a broad spectrum of antifungal activity in methionine-free medium and has been suggested to inhibit sulfite fixation. We have further investigated the mode of action by which azoxybacilin kills fungi. The compound inhibited the incorporation of [35S] sulfate into acid-insoluble fractions of Saccharomyces cerevisiae under conditions in which virtually no inhibition was observed for DNA, RNA, or protein synthesis. It did not interfere with the activity of the enzymes for sulfate assimilation but clearly inhibited the induction of those enzymes when S. cerevisiae cells were transferred from rich medium to a synthetic methionine-free medium. Particularly strong inhibition was observed in the induction of sulfite reductase. Northern (RNA) analysis revealed that azoxybacilin decreased the level of mRNA of genes for sulfate assimilation, including MET10 for sulfite reductase and MET4, the transactivator of MET10 and other sulfate assimilation genes. When activities of azoxybacilin were compared for mRNA and enzyme syntheses from MET10, the concentration required for inhibition of transcription of the gene was about 10 times higher (50% inhibitory concentration = 30 micrograms/ml) than that required for inhibition of induction of enzyme synthesis (50% inhibitory concentration = 3 micrograms/ml). The data suggest that azoxybacilin acts on at least two steps in the expression of sulfite reductase; the transcriptional activation of MET4 and a posttranscriptional regulation in MET10 expression. We conclude that azoxybacilin exhibits antifungal activity by interfering with the regulation of expression of sulfite reductase activity.    On starvation, the soil bacterium Bacillus subtilis stops dividing and initiates sporulation, a simple developmental process involving the differentiation of two cell types. Sporulation begins with a reorganization of the cell cycle, to produce cells with the size and chromosome content appropriate for the developmental process. The central division that would normally occur, to produce a pair of identical daughter cells, is blocked and the cell divides asymmetrically to produce a small, polar prespore cell and a much larger mother cell. The developmental fates of the two cells are dictated by the localized activation of cell-specific transcription factors, which are controlled by mechanisms that respond to the cellular asymmetry.    A system for the positive selection of structural plasmid rearrangements in Bacillus subtilis was developed. Random deletions removing a transcription terminator structure in the assay plasmid, designated pGP100, resulted in expression of the cat-86 gene, under control of a constitutive bacteriophage promoter. The resulting chlorampenicol-resistant colonies were analyzed for plasmid contents and were shown, by restriction analysis, to contain initially both the intact parental plasmid and a deletion variant. Sequence analysis of deletion derivatives revealed a consensus target site (5&apos;-A-T-T-A-A/T-3&apos;) at or near deletion termini, which resembles topoisomerase I target sites. Endpoints on one side of the deletions were found to be clustered in the promoter region of the tetracycline resistance gene present on pGP100, the gene product of which is an integral membrane protein. Furthermore, deletion of the genes encoding the ATP-dependent exonuclease, AddAB, severely reduced the structural stability of pGP100. The data indicate that similar mechanisms underlie deletion formation in pGP100, and a different plasmid-based system, pGP1, which we have analyzed previously.    Here we describe an African swine fever virus (ASFV) protein encoded by the open reading frame 5-AR that shares structural and functional similarities with the family of bacterial histone-like proteins which include histone-like DNA binding proteins, integration host factor, and Bacillus phage SPO1 transcription factor, TF1. The ASFV 5-AR gene was cloned by PCR and expressed in E. coli. Monospecific antiserum prepared to the 5-AR bacterial expression product specifically immunoprecipitated a protein of approximately 11.6 kDa from ASFV infected swine macrophages at late times post infection. Additionally, the 5-AR expression product was strongly recognized by ASFV convalescent pig serum, indicating its antigenicity during natural infection. Cloned p11.6 bound both double and single stranded DNA-cellulose columns. Consistent with a DNA binding function, immunoelectronmicroscopy localized p11.6 to the virion nucleoid, To our knowledge, p11.6 is the first bacterial histone-like DNA-binding protein found in an animal virus or eukaryotic cell system.    The CcpA protein has been identified as a key regulator of carbon metabolism in Bacillus subtilis. CcpA is a DNA binding protein in the LacI/GalR transcriptional repressor family, and genes which respond to CcpA contain common cis-acting target sequences (Ccp boxes). A number of pathways involved in carbon source utilization are repressed by CcpA, while at least one gene which is involved in excretion of excess carbon is activated by CcpA. Genes repressed by CcpA generally contain Ccp boxes within or downstream of the promoter, while ackA, which is activated by CcpA, contains Ccp boxes upstream of the promoter. It therefore appears that CcpA acts globally to direct carbon flow in B. subtilis.    A cluster of arginine biosynthetic genes of Corynebacterium glutamicum ATCC 13032, comprising argJ, argB and argD as well as part of argC and argF, has been cloned by heterologous complementation of an Escherichia coli argE mutant. The gene order has been established as argCJBDF by sequencing the entire 4.4 kb cloned DNA fragment. The C. glutamicum argB gene can be transcribed in E. coli cells from an internal promoter located in the coding part of the preceding argJ gene, whereas transcription of the argJ gene appears vector-dependent. Expression of the corynebacterial argB gene is repressed by arginine in the native host but not in recombinant E. coli cells. Feedback inhibition of the corresponding N-acetylglutamate kinase activity was observed both in cell extracts of C. glutamicum and in recombinant E. coli argB auxotrophic strains. Extracts of E. coli cells carrying cloned corynebacterial DNA display an ornithine acetyltransferase activity (encoded by argJ) which alleviates the acetylornithinase (encoded by argE) deficiency of the enterobacterial host. In contrast to Bacillus stearothermophilus ornithine acetyltransferase which also exhibits acetylglutamate synthase activity, C. glutamicum ornithine acetyltransferase appears monofunctional. ArgA and ArgB proteins from different sources share highly significant similarities. The evolutionary implications of these data are discussed.    sigma E and sigma K are sporulation-specific sigma factors of Bacillus subtilis that are synthesized as inactive proproteins. Pro-sigma E and pro-sigma K are activated by the removal of 27 and 20 amino acids, respectively, from their amino termini. To explore the properties of the precursor-specific sequences, we exchanged the coding elements for these domains in the sigma E and sigma K structural genes and determined the properties of the resulting chimeric proteins in B. subtilis. The pro-sigma E-sigma K chimera accumulated and was cleaved into active sigma K, while the pro-sigma K-sigma E fusion protein failed to accumulate and is likely unstable in B. subtilis. A fusion of the sigE &quot;pro&quot; sequence to an unrelated protein (bovine rhodanese) also formed a protein that was cleaved by the pro-sigma E processing apparatus. The data suggest that the sigma E pro sequence contains sufficient information for pro-sigma E processing as well as a unique quality needed for sigma E accumulation.    The genes encoding deoxyriboaldolase (dra), nucleoside uptake protein (nupC), and pyrimidine nucleoside sequences were determined. Sequence analysis showed that the genes were localized immediately downstream of the hut operon. Insertional gene disruption studies indicated that the three genes constitute an operon with the gene order dra-nupC-pdp. A promoter mapping immediately upstream of the dra gene was identified, and downstream of the pdp gene the nucleotide sequence indicated the existence of a factor-independent transcription terminator structure. In wild-type cells growing in succinate minimal medium, the pyrimidine nucleoside phosphorylase and deoxyriboaldolase levels were five- to eightfold higher in the presence of thymidine and fourfold higher in the presence of deoxyadenosine. By the use of lacZ fusions, the regulation was found to be at the level of transcription. The operon expression was subject to glucose repression. Upstream of the dra gene an open reading frame of 313 amino acids was identified. Inactivation of this gene led to an approximately 10-fold increase in the levels of deoxyriboaldolase and pyrimidine nucleoside phosphorylase, and no further induction was seen upon the addition of deoxyribonucleosides. The upstream gene most likely encodes the regulator for the dra-nupC-pdp operon and was designated deoR (stands for deoxyribonucleoside regulator).    A new method has been developed in order to select mutants showing decreased puc operon transcription in Rhodobacter sphaeroides 2.4.1. A transcriptional fusion of a promoterless fragment derived from the sacB gene, encoding the levansucrase from Bacillus subtilis, to the upstream regulatory region of the puc operon has been constructed. With appropriate levels of exogenous sucrose, survivors of a sucrose killing challenge have been isolated. Subsequent analysis revealed the presence of both cis- and trans-acting &quot;down&quot; mutations in relation to puc operon expression. One of the trans-acting regulatory mutations was chosen for further study. The original mutation showed less than 2% of the level of puc operon transcription compared with the wild type under aerobic conditions and an 86% reduction under dark dimethyl sulfoxide conditions. This mutation can be complemented by a 3.9-kb BamHI DNA fragment derived from a cosmid contained within a genomic cosmid bank. DNA sequence analysis of this fragment revealed the presence of a 2.8-kb open reading frame, designated mgpS, which would encode a 930-amino-acid protein. The N-terminal portion of the putative protein product presents homologies to proteins of the RNA helicase family. Disruption of the chromosomal mgpS resulted in decreased transcription of both puc and puf, while the presence of mgpS in multicopy in the wild type, 2.4.1., increased puc expression by a factor of 2 under aerobic conditions. Structural analysis of the mgpS locus revealed that expression of mgpS was likely to be complex. A smaller protein containing the 472 C-terminal amino acids of MgpS is able to act by itself as an activator of puc transcription and is expressed independently of the large open reading frame in which it is contained.    Production of Bacillus subtilis exoproteases is positively regulated by the DegS-DegU two-component regulatory system and other regulatory factors including DegR and ProB. It was shown that the expression of degR was virtually abolished in a sigD mutant and that the transcriptional initiation site in vivo is preceded by a sequence very similar to the consensus sequence of sigma D-recognized promoters. Alteration of the -10 sequence of the putative promoter greatly reduced the expression of degR. These results show that degR expression is driven by the alternative sigma factor, sigma D. It was found that degR expression was suppressed by multiple copies of proB on plasmid pLC1 and that this suppression was exerted at the transcriptional level through a target in the vicinity of the degR promoter. Furthermore, it was shown that the expression of another sigma D-directed gene, hag, was suppressed by pLC1. Suppression by pLC1 diminished when the sequence of the -10 element of the degR promoter was changed to a sigma A-like promoter sequence. pLC1, however, did not suppress sigD expression. On the basis of these results, we conclude that multicopy proB on pLC1 inhibits transcription from sigma D-driven promoters by affecting some posttranscriptional process of sigma D.    Some bacterial pathogens elaborate and secrete virulence factors in response to environmental signals, others in response to a specific host product, and still others in response to no discernible cue. In this study, we have demonstrated that the synthesis of Staphylococcus aureus virulence factors is controlled by a density-sensing system that utilizes an octapeptide produced by the organism itself. The octapeptide activates expression of the agr locus, a global regulator of the virulence response. This response involves the reciprocal regulation of genes encoding surface proteins and those encoding secreted virulence factors. As cells enter the postexponential phase, surface protein genes are repressed by agr and secretory protein genes are subsequently activated. The intracellular agr effector is a regulatory RNA, RNAIII, whose transcription is activated by an agr-encoded signal transduction system for which the octapeptide is the ligand.    Bacillus subtilis is able to grow anaerobically using alternative electron acceptors, including nitrate or fumarate. We characterized an operon encoding the dissimilatory nitrate reductase subunits homologous to the Escherichia coli narGHJI operon and the narK gene encoding a protein with nitrite extrusion activity. Downstream from narK and co-transcribed with it a gene (fnr) encoding a protein homologous to E.coli FNR was found. Disruption of fnr abolished both nitrate and fumarate utilization as electron acceptors and anaerobic induction of narK. Four putative FNR binding sites were found in B.subtilis sequences. The consensus sequence, centred at position -41.5, is identical to the consensus for the DNA site for E.coli CAP. Bs-FNR contained a four cysteine residue cluster at its C-terminal end. This is in contrast to Ec-FNR, where a similar cluster is present at the N-terminal end. It is possible that oxygen modulates the activity of both activators by a similar mechanism involving iron. Unlike in E.coli, where fnr expression is weakly repressed by anaerobiosis, fnr gene expression in B.subtilis is strongly activated by anaerobiosis. We have identified in the narK-fnr intergenic region a promotor activated by anaerobiosis independently of FNR. Thus induction of genes involved in anaerobic respiration requires in B.subtilis at least two levels of regulation: activation of fnr transcription and activation of FNR to induce transcription of FNR-dependent promoters.    The gcaD, prs, and ctc genes were shown to be organized as a tricistronic operon. The transcription of the prs gene, measured as phosphoribosyl diphosphate synthetase activity, and of the ctc gene, measured as beta-galactosidase activity specified by a ctc-lacZ protein fusion, were dependent on the promoter in front of the gcaD gene. Analysis of cDNA molecules prepared with gcaD-prs-ctc-specified mRNA as the template revealed an RNA transcript that encompassed all three cistrons.    The genes encoding two subunits of acetyl coenzyme A carboxylase, biotin carboxyl carrier protein, and biotin carboxylase have been cloned from Bacillus subtilis. DNA sequencing and RNA blot hybridization studies indicated that the B. subtilis accB homolog which encodes biotin carboxyl carrier protein, is part of an operon that includes accC, the gene encoding the biotin carboxylase subunit of acetyl coenzyme A carboxylase.    DNase I footprinting experiments showed that AbrB binds to the regulatory regions of the spo0H, kinB, ftsAZ, and pbpE genes. A conserved motif was found in these and other AbrB-binding sites. A search for Bacillus subtilis DNA sequences containing this motif led to the prediction that AbrB would bind to the promoter controlling the bsuB1 methylase gene. DNase I footprinting experiments confirmed this prediction.    The LevR protein is the activator of expression of the levanase operon of Bacillus subtilis. The promoter of this operon is recognized by RNA polymerase containing the sigma 54-like factor sigma L. One domain of the LevR protein is homologous to activators of the NtrC family, and another resembles antiterminator proteins of the BglG family. It has been proposed that the domain which is similar to antiterminators is a target of phosphoenolpyruvate:sugar phosphotransferase system (PTS)-dependent regulation of LevR activity. We show that the LevR protein is not only negatively regulated by the fructose-specific enzyme IIA/B of the phosphotransferase system encoded by the levanase operon (lev-PTS) but also positively controlled by the histidine-containing phosphocarrier protein (HPr) of the PTS. This second type of control of LevR activity depends on phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent phosphorylation of HPr histidine 15, as demonstrated with point mutations in the ptsH gene encoding HPr. In vitro phosphorylation of partially purified LevR was obtained in the presence of phosphoenolpyruvate, enzyme I, and HPr. The dependence of truncated LevR polypeptides on stimulation by HPr indicated that the domain homologous to antiterminators is the target of HPr-dependent regulation of LevR activity. This domain appears to be duplicated in the LevR protein. The first antiterminator-like domain seems to be the target of enzyme I and HPr-dependent phosphorylation and the site of LevR activation, whereas the carboxy-terminal antiterminator-like domain could be the target for negative regulation by the lev-PTS.    There are two levels of control of the expression of the levanase operon in Bacillus subtilis: induction by fructose, which involves a positive regulator, LevR, and the fructose phosphotransferase system encoded by this operon (lev-PTS), and a global regulation, catabolite repression. The LevR activator interacts with its target, the upstream activating sequence (UAS), to stimulate the transcription of the E sigma L complex bound at the &quot;-12, -24&quot; promoter. Levanase operon expression in the presence of glucose was tested in strains carrying a ccpA gene disruption or a ptsH1 mutation in which Ser-46 of HPr is replaced by Ala. In a levR+ inducible genetic background, the expression of the levanase operon was partially resistant to catabolite repression in both mutants, indicating that the CcpA repressor and the HPr-SerP protein are involved in the glucose control of this operon. In addition, a cis-acting catabolite-responsive element (CRE) of the levanase operon was identified and investigated by site-directed mutagenesis. The CRE sequence TGAAAACGCTT(a)ACA is located between positions -50 and -36 from the transcriptional start site, between the UAS and the -12, -24 promoter. However, in a background constitutive for levanase, neither HPr, CcpA, nor CRE is involved in glucose repression, suggesting the existence of a different pathway of glucose regulation. Using truncated LevR proteins, we showed that this CcpA-independent pathway required the presence of the domain of LevR (amino acids 411 to 689) homologous to the BglG family of bacterial antiterminators.    We have identified an operon in Bacillus subtilis, designated qcr, that is thought to encode a quinone: cytochrome c reductase. Northern (RNA blot) analysis suggests a tricistronic operon. The operon is located at about 200 degrees on the B. subtilis map. Disruption of the operon leads to loss of a 22-kDa cytochrome c from membrane preparations. The structure of the putative protein products of the qcr operon suggests a protein complex that is closely related to but distinct from known cytochrome bc1 and b6f complexes, which catalyze electron transfer from a quinol to a c-type cytochrome or to plastocyanin. QcrA is similar to Rieske-type iron-sulfur proteins; QcrB is similar in size and sequence to b-type cytochromes from b6f complexes; and QcrC has a novel structure that resembles a fusion of a subunit IV (found in b6f complexes) to a cytochrome c. Transcription of the operon is induced at the end of exponential growth from a sigma A-like promoter. This transition state induction appears to be dependent on the downregulation of abrB expression, which is mediated by Spo0A activation. As bacteria move from the transition state into sporulation, transcription of the operon is reduced in a sigma F-dependent manner.    A Bacillus subtilis ribose transport operon (rbs) was shown to be subject to AbrB-mediated control through direct AbrB-DNA binding interactions in the vicinity of the promoter. Overproduction of AbrB was shown to relieve catabolite repression of rbs during growth in the presence of poorer carbon sources such as arabinose but had much less effect when cells were grown in the presence of glucose, a rapidly metabolizable carbon source. A ccpA mutation relieved catabolite repression of rbs under all conditions tested. One of the AbrB-binding sites on the rbs promoter contains the putative site of action for the B. subtilis catabolite repressor protein CcpA, suggesting that competition for binding to this site could be at least partly responsible for modulating rbs expression during carbon-limited growth.    In some eubacteria with a dnaK locus in which grpE is close upstream of dnaK, grpE is preceded by an open reading frame (orf) believed to be a heat-shock gene. We also found an orf, orf16, upstream of grpE in the archaeon Methanosarcina mazei S-6, but this gene differs from the eubacterial counterpart: it is shorter, does not respond to a temperature upshift as heat-shock genes do, and the deduced protein Orf16, does not resemble the proteins coded by the eubacterial equivalents. orf16 is expressed monocistronically, with a transcription initiation site 24 bases upstream of the translation start codon, 22 bases downstream of a putative promoter identical to the consensus promoter for genes in methanogens. This initiation site is used by heat-shocked and non-heat-shocked cells in the two morphologic stages of M. mazei S-6 tested, i.e., packets and single cells. Three transcription termination sites were identified, one of which is detectable only in non-heat-shocked cells. Data from comparative analyses of the Orf16 deduced amino acid sequence and those of other known proteins, as well as the apparent biochemical characteristics of Orf16, suggest that the latter is a membrane molecule.    The development of genetic competence in Bacillus subtilis requires the synthesis of ComK, a transcription factor, which is normally produced as a culture enters the stationary phase. This synthesis is known to be regulated in part by the protein MecA. Loss-of-function mutations in mecA result in overexpression of ComK and its appearance early during exponential growth. We show here that mecA inactivation also causes a loss of colony-forming ability, especially during stationary phase. This loss is accompanied by the appearance of cells in which normal nucleoid separation has failed to occur. Renografin gradient fractionation of mecA cultures grown to competence reveals that nearly 100% of the cells band at the low buoyant density characteristic of competent cells, and that this low density is competence-related. The loss of viability, the low buoyant density and the nucleoid separation defect, are all comK-dependent. The loss of viability can be reversed by even the transient introduction of mecA+. It is proposed that these effects of ComK overexpression are related to the DNA replication arrest normally exhibited by the competent cell fraction and that MecA is needed to reverse this arrest and to permit escape from the competent state. The shift of nearly 100% of the cells to light buoyant density in a mecA mutant culture strongly suggests that the MecA protein is a regulator of the cell-type-specific expression of competence.    We have cloned the L4 ribosomal protein genes from Morganella morganii and Haemophilus influenza. The sequences of these genes were compared with published sequences for Escherichia coli, Yersinia pseudotuberculosis, and Bacillus stearothermophilus. All five of these L4 genes were expressed in E. coli and shown to function as repressors of both transcription and translation of the E. coli S10 operon. Possible implications for regulation of r-protein synthesis in species other E. coli are discussed.    Bacillus anthracis produces two toxins composed of three proteins. Genetic tools were constructed to study the regulation of toxin synthesis. They included transcriptional fusions with various reporter genes, in replicative and integrative vectors. The reporter gene xylE, encoding catechol 2,3-dioxygenase, may be valuable for screening of strong promoters, as expression of the gene can be visualized directly and the studies of regulation in B. anthracis. Therefore, transcriptional fusions between a lacZ reporter gene and the toxin genes were constructed. Experiments with a multicopy plasmid in trans suggested that the transcriptional activator(s) of the toxin genes were not titrated. B. anthracis strains, which contain pXO1 carrying multiple copies of fusions, were analysed. Expression of the reporter gene was proportional to the fusion copy number. Indeed, single integration of a suicide plasmid can be distinguished from multiple integration according to the level of resistance to an appropriate antibiotic. Finally, recombination in B. anthracis was found to be very efficient (approximately 10(-2) recombinants per transconjugant cell.    The Bacillus subtilis sacXY regulatory operon is involved in sucrose induction of the levansucrase sacB gene by an antitermination mechanism. In the presence of sucrose, the activated SacY antiterminator protein stabilizes the secondary structure of a ribonucleic antiterminator sequence (RAT) located in the leader region of the sacB transcript, and overlapping a rho-independent transcription terminator. Formation of the SacY-RAT complex prevents alternative formation of the terminator, allowing transcription of the downstream sequences. In the absence of sucrose, inhibition of SacY activity by SacX leads to termination of transcription. Expression of sacXY is also sucrose-inducible. This induction was previously shown to be mediated by SacY itself and/or SacT, another antiterminator involved in induction of genes belonging to a distinct sucrose pathway. These antiterminators are not activated at the same concentration of sucrose. We show here that sacXY induction occurs through activation of either SacY or SacT antiterminators, at their respective sucrose activation concentration. This result demonstrates a link between SacY- and SacT-mediated metabolic pathways. In addition, the sacXY leader region carries a RAT-like sequence, which however does not appear to overlap any apparent rho-independent transcription terminator. Site-directed mutagenesis experiments on this RAT-like sequence demonstrated its involvement in sucrose induction. Deletions generated in the sacXY leader region showed that a palindrome, located 100 nt downstream from the RAT-like sequence, also acts as a cis-acting element. Computer analysis of the leader RNA suggested that formation of the secondary structure of the RAT-like sequence and the palindrome could be mutually exclusive.    Induction of the Bacillus subtilis kinA gene, which codes for a major kinase of the phosphorelay pathway, required the spo0H gene, coding for the sigma H protein, but not the genes spo0A, spo0B, and spo0F at the onset of sporulation. Also, the levels of sigma H in spo0A, spo0B, and spo0F mutants were increased at the onset of sporulation, though induction of spo0H transcription in all of these mutants was appreciably inhibited. In addition, kinA expression was almost completely eliminated in a medium supplemented with excess glucose and glutamine, even though the usual stationary-phase-associated increase in sigma H was observed under these conditions.    The association of a sigma factor (sigma) with RNA polymerase in bacteria determines its specificity of promoter utilization. To identify amino acid residues in sigma E from Bacillus subtilis that determine the specificity of its interaction with the nucleotides at the -10 region of its cognate promoters, we tested whether base pair substitutions in the -10 region of a sigma B-dependent promoter could signal its utilization by sigma E-RNA polymerase. We found that a combination of base pair substitutions at positions -15 and -14 of the sigma B-dependent ctc promoter resulted in its utilization by sigma E-RNA polymerase in vivo. We also found that the combination of two amino acid substitutions at positions 119 and 120 in sigma E changed its specificity for promoter utilization, resulting in a sigma factor that directed transcription from the sigma B-dependent ctc promoter, but not from sigma E-dependent promoters. These results suggest that amino acid residues at positions 119 and 120 determine, at least in part, the specificity of interactions between sigma E and the nucleotides in the -10 region of its cognate promoters.    PrfA is a pleiotropic activator of virulence gene expression in the pathogenic bacterium Listeria monocytogenes. Several lines of evidence have suggested that a hierarchy of virulence gene activation by PrfA exists. This hypothesis was investigated by assessing the ability of PrfA to activate the expression of virulence gene fusions to lacZ in Bacillus subtilis. Expression of PrfA in this heterologous host was sufficient for activation of transcription at the hly, plcA, mpl, and actA promoters. Activation was most efficient at the divergently transcribed hly and plcA promoters. The putative PrfA binding site shared by these promoters is perfectly symmetrical and appears to represent the optimum sequence for target gene activation by PrfA. The activation of actA and mpl expression was considerably weaker and occurred more slowly than that observed at the hly and plcA promoters, suggesting that greater quantities of PrfA are required for productive interaction at these promoters. Interestingly, expression of an inlA-lacZ transcriptional fusion was very poorly activated by PrfA in B. subtilis, suggesting that other Listeria factors, in addition to PrfA, are required for PrfA-mediated activation at this promoter. Further support for the involvement of such factors was obtained by constructing and analyzing a prfA deletion mutant of L. monocytogenes. We observed that, in contrast to that of the other genes of the PrfA regulon, expression of inlA is only partially dependent on PrfA.    An inverted repeat sequence known as CIRCE (controlling inverted repeat of chaperone expression) in the Bacillus subtilis groE operon has been suggested to function as an operator. To identify the regulatory gene directly or indirectly involved in CIRCE-mediated heat-inducible groE expression, B. subtilis WBG2, carrying an integrated groE-bgaB transcription fusion in the amyE locus, was mutagenized. Dark blue colonies formed at 37 degrees C represent mutants which constitutively produce BgaB (a thermostable beta-galactosidase) at high levels. Seven mutants (WBG101 to WBG107) were selected for further characterization. They all overproduced BgaB, GroEL, and DnaK simultaneously at 37 degrees C. These mutants could be restored to normal by introducing a plasmid carrying a functional copy of orf39, the first gene in the B. subtilis dnaK operon. Genomic sequencing of these mutants demonstrated that they all carried a single mutation in orf39. These mutations can be divided into three groups: (i) Gly-307 to Asp, (ii) Ser-122 to Phe, and (iii) Gly-63 to Glu. By using a binary vector system in E. coli, production of ORF39 was found to negatively regulate the expression of groE-bgaB in a CIRCE-specific manner. Under the heat shock condition, the negative regulation mediated by ORF39 was abolished. Mobility shift of the CIRCE-containing probe was also observed with the crude extract prepared from the E. coli strain that overproduced ORF39. Therefore, ORF39 is the negative regulatory factor which regulates both groE and dnaK expression in B. subtilis. It is likely to function as a CIRCE-specific repressor.    Expression of the Bacillus subtilis trpEDCFBA operon has been shown to be regulated by transcription attenuation in response to the availability of L-tryptophan. Regulation is mediated by the tryptophan-activated trp RNA-binding attenuation protein, TRAP, the product of mtrB. Formation of mutually exclusive RNA anti-terminator and terminator structures within trp leader RNA determines whether transcription will terminate in the leader region of the operon. Previous studies suggested that transcripts that escape termination are subject to translational regulation via the formation of a secondary structure that blocks ribosome access to the trpE ribosome-binding site. To assess the relative importance of these postulated events in trp operon regulation, we used site-directed mutagenesis to alter the putative elements involved in transcriptional and translational control. Using a trpE&apos;-&apos;lacZ reporter, we measured translational yield and specific mRNA levels with various leader constructs, in both mtrB+ and mtrB strains, during growth in the presence and absence of excess tryptophan. To verify that the altered regulatory regions behaved as expected, we carried out in vitro transcription assays with the wild-type and altered leader region templates and performed oligonucleotide competition assays with an oligonucleotide complementary to a segment of the transcription terminator. Our results establish that binding of TRAP to leader RNA regulates of transcription termination in the trp operon over about an 88-fold range and regulates translation of trpE over about a 13-fold range. The roles played by different trp leader RNA segments in mediating transcriptional and translational regulation are documented by our findings.    The BamHI restriction-modification system contains a third gene, bamHIC, which positively regulates bamHIR. Similar small genes from other systems were tested in vivo for their ability to cross-complement. C.BamHI protein was identified, purified, and used to raise polyclonal antibodies. Attempts to detect other C proteins in cell extracts by cross-reactivity with C.BamHI antibodies proved unsuccessful.    The DNA-binding protein GerE is the latest-acting regulatory protein in the mother cell line of gene expression during sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. GerE directs the transcription of several genes that encode structural components of the protein coat that encases the mature spore. We report on the identification and characterization of a cluster of additional genes whose transcription is dependent on GerE. These genes, which are located in the replication terminus region of the chromosome (181 degrees on the genetic map), are arranged in adjacent and divergently oriented operons called cgeAB and cgeCDE, which consist of two and at least three genes, respectively. CgeD, the product of the second member of the cgeCDE operon, is strikingly similar to the product of a B. subtilis gene (ipa-63d) of unknown function and is similar at its amino terminus to certain glycosyl transferases involved in polysaccharide biosynthesis. Strains with mutations in the cgeAB and cgeCDE operons produce spores with altered surface properties, on which basis we propose that proteins encoded by these operons influence maturation of the outermost layer of the spore, perhaps by glycosylation of coat proteins at the spore surface.    Cell fate is determined by cell-specific activation of transcription factor sigma F after asymmetric division during sporulation by Bacillus subtilis. The activity of sigma F is governed by SpoIIAA, SpoIIAB, and SpoIIE, a membrane protein localized at the polar septum. SpoIIAB binds to and inhibits sigma F, and SpoIIAA inhibits SpoIIAB, which prevents SpoIIAB from binding to sigma F. SpoIIAB is also a serine kinase that inactivates SpoIIAA. Here, it is demonstrated that SpoIIE dephosphorylates SpoIIAA-P and overcomes SpoIIAB-mediated inhibition of sigma F. The finding that SpoIIE is a serine phosphatase links asymmetric division to the pathway governing cell-specific gene transcription.    Asymmetric division in Bacillus subtilis generates progeny cells with dissimilar fates. SpoIIE, a membrane protein required for the establishment of cell type, was shown to localize near sites of potential polar division. SpoIIE initially localizes in a bipolar pattern, coalescing at marks in the cell envelope at which asymmetric division can take place. Then, during division, SpoIIE becomes restricted to the polar septum and is lost from the distal pole. Thus, when division is complete, SpoIIE sits at the boundary between the progeny from which it dictates cell fate by the activation of a cell-specific transcription factor.    We present biochemical evidence for an intercellular signal transduction pathway in B. subtilis. This pathway governs the conversion of the proprotein pro-sigma E to mature transcription factor sigma E. Proteolytic processing is mediated by the membrane protein SpollGA and is triggered by the inferred extracellular signal protein SpollR. A factor in conditioned medium from B. subtilis cells engineered to produce SpollR during growth triggered processing in protoplasts of B. subtilis cells that had been engineered to produce SpollGA and pro-sigma E. The factor was also detected in, and partially purified from, extracts of SpollR-producing cells of E. coli. We speculate that SpollGA is both a receptor and a protease and the SpollR interacts with SpollGA on the outside of the cytoplasmic membrane, activating the intracellular protease domain of SpollGA.    A second sipS2(BA) gene was PCR cloned from Bacillus amyloliquefaciens. The deduced aa sequence is similar to those of the SPases of B. subtilis, B. amyloliquefaciens, and B. licheniformis and the domain structure of the gene has been preserved. A low level of monocistronic gene transcription could be shown using Northern analysis. The sipS2(BA) gene was mapped to a region downstream of an E. coli fruA gene homologue and shown to express a 21 kDa protein in Escherichia coli.    Based on the studies of the FliA protein in Bacillus subtilis (Bs) and Salmonella typhimurium (St), the Escherichia coli (Ec) fliA gene has been proposed to encode a flagellar-specific sigma factor, sigma 28. In this study, the complete nucleotide (nt) sequence of Ec fliA was determined. The fliA coding region consists of 717 nt starting with a GTG start codon and ending with a TAA stop codon. The gene product is predicted to be 239 amino acids (26,435 Da). Sequence comparison between Ec FliA and the sigma 28 of St revealed 93.7% identity. Gene fliA was amplified by the polymerase chain reaction, subcloned into expression vector pT7-7, and overexpressed. The overproduced 28-kDa FliA protein, recognized by the St anti-sigma 28 antibody, was purified to homogeneity. The purified protein was able to initiate transcription from the tar promoter in the presence of RNP core enzyme. We conclude that FliA functions as an alternative sigma factor sigma 28 which is specific for flagellar operons in Ec.    Rifampicin and streptolydigin are antibiotics which inhibit prokaryotic RNA polymerase at the initiation and elongation steps, respectively. In Escherichia coli, resistance to each antibiotic results from alterations in the beta subunit of the core enzyme. However, in Bacillus subtilis, reconstitution studies found rifampicin resistance (RifR) associated with the beta subunit and streptolydigin resistance (StlR) with beta&apos;. To understand the basis of bacterial StlR, we isolated the B. subtilis rpoC gene, which encodes a 1,199-residue product that is 53% identical to E. coli beta&apos;. Two spontaneous StlR mutants carried the same D796G substitution in rpoC, and this substitution alone was sufficient to confer StlR in vivo. D796 falls within Region F, which is conserved among the largest subunits of prokaryotic and eukaryotic RNA polymerases. Among eukaryotes, alterations in Region F promote resistance to alpha-amanitin, a toxin which inhibits transcription elongation; among prokaryotes, alterations in Region F cause aberrant termination. To determine whether alterations in the beta subunit of B. subtilis could also confer StlR, we made three StlR substitutions (A499V, G500R, and E502V) in the rif region of rpoB. Together these results suggest that beta and beta&apos; interact to form an Stl binding site, and that this site is important for transcription elongation.    In order to determine which amino acyl residues in a secondary sigma factor govern its specificity of recognition at the -35 region of promoters, we examined the effects of amino acid substitutions in sigma E in Bacillus subtilis that made the sequence of its putative -35 recognition region more similar to another sigma factor in B. subtilis, sigma K. We found that a single amino acid substitution at position 217 of sigma E resulted in a sigma factor that could direct transcription from sigma K-dependent promoters. Furthermore, we tested whether this amino acid substitution in sigma E had changed the specificity of interactions of the sigma with -35 region sequences by examining the activity of the mutant sigma E on derivatives of sigma E-dependent promoters that contained single base-pair substitutions. We found that this substitution in sigma E specifically suppressed the effect of a single base-pair substitution at position -31 in a sigma E-dependent promoter spoIIID. The amino acyl residue at another position (219) on sigma E affected the specificity of interaction with position -33 in spoIIID promoter. The amino acyl residues at the two positions in sigma E, 217 and 219, that determine the specificity of interactions between the sigma and base-pairs in the -35 region of its cognate promoters (positions -33 and -31, respectively, in the spoIIID promoter) probably closely contact these base-pairs.    Upon the cessation of exponential growth, Bacillus subtilis enters a transition phase leading to either sporulation or a non-sporulating stationary phase. During this transition period, cells secrete degradative enzymes, become competent for DNA transformation, are motile and acquire resistance to oxidative killing. We now report that mrgA, originally identified as a gene repressed by metal ions, encodes a member of the Dps/PexB family of general stress proteins. Like Escherichia coli Dps(PexB), MrgA forms highly stable, multimeric protein-DNA complexes which accumulate in stationary-phase cells and protect against oxidative killing. MrgA is part of an inducible oxidative stress response in B. subtilis: mrgA is induced by hydrogen peroxide, and a strain lacking MrgA displays increased sensitivity to oxidative killing. In addition, a hydrogen peroxide-resistant mutant, which constitutively overproduces catalase and alkyl hydroperoxide reductase, also overproduces MrgA. These results indicate a complex interplay between metal ions and the expression of the B. subtilis oxidative stress response.    The production of insecticidal crystal proteins (ICPs) in Bacillus thuringiensis normally coincides with sporulation, resulting in the appearance of parasporal crystalline inclusions within the mother cell. In most instances, the temporal and spatial regulation of ICP gene expression is determined at the transcriptional level by mother-cell-specific sigma factors that share homology with sigma E and sigma K from Bacillus subtilis. The cryIII ICP genes are a notable exception; these genes are transcribed from sigma A-like promoters during vegetative growth, are induced or derepressed at the onset of stationary phase, and are overexpressed in sporulation mutants of B. thuringiensis blocked in the phosphorylation of Spo0A, a key regulator of sporulation initiation. Transcription alone, however, cannot account for the impressive ability of this bacterium to accumulate insecticidal proteins. A variety of post-transcriptional and post-translational mechanisms also contribute to the efficient production of ICPs in B. thuringiensis, thus making this bacterium a cost-effective biological control agent.    Cilia-associated respiratory (CAR) bacillus was detected by means of the reverse transcription (RT)-polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and the results were compared with those of indirect immunofluorescence test (IFAT) for the detection of the organism. In the experimental infections, 15 mice were in contact with mice previously inoculated with CAR bacillus. Three mice each were tested at days 3, 5, 7, 12 and 20 postexposure. On day 3 postexposure, CAR bacillus was detected in oral swab samples from all 3 mice by RT-PCR, but was not detected in any sampling sites from the mice by IFAT. Total numbers of positive samples from nasal, oral and tracheal swabs obtained through the test were 6/15, 14/15 and 8/15, respectively, by RT-PCR, and 2/15, 6/15 and 3/15, respectively by IFAT. For the detection of CAR bacillus in samples from 52 rats, 34 serum antibody negative rats by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay were also negative by RT-PCR and IFAT except for one sample from the oral cavity, and all serum antibody positive rats were positive for the organism by RT-PCR but it could not be detected in five of them by IFAT. By means of RT-PCR, no differences in the positive rates depending on sampling sites were observed except in one rat. The RT-PCR was found to be a specific, highly sensitive and reliable procedure for detecting CAR bacillus in mice and rats. The oral cavity was the most suitable site for the diagnosis of the early stage of this infection by RT-PCR.    We report the use of the green fluorescent protein (GFP) of Aequorea victoria to visualize cell-specific gene expression and protein subcellular localization during sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. Sporangia bearing the gene (gfp) for the green fluorescent protein fused to genes under the control of the sporulation transcription factor sigma F exhibited a forespore-specific pattern of fluorescence. Forespore-specific fluorescence could be detected with fusions to promoters that are utilized with low (csfB) and high (sspE-2G) efficiency by sigma F-containing RNA polymerase. Conversely, a mother cell-specific pattern of fluorescence was observed in sporangia bearing a transcriptional fusion of gfp to a spore coat protein gene (cotE) under the control of sigma E and an in-frame fusion to a regulatory gene (gerE) under the control of sigma K. An in-frame fusion of gfp to cotE demonstrated that GFP can also be used to visualize protein subcellular localization. In sporangia producing the CotE-GFP fusion protein, fluorescence was found to localize around the developing spore, and this localization was dependent upon SpoIVA, a morphogenetic protein known to determine proper localization of CotE.    Five of the genes known to encode the enzymes for the synthesis of poly(glycerol phosphate), the major teichoic acid of Bacillus subtilis 168, are organized in two divergently transcribed operons, tagAB and tagDEF. lacZ and gus transcriptional fusions to the first genes of these operons revealed that: (i) in media of different richness, higher growth rates were paralleled by lower transcription levels; (ii) upon transition to stationary phase, the transcription per unit mass of both operons increased abruptly by a factor of about two; and (iii) a rise in temperature was accompanied by decreased transcription of tagA and increased transcription of tagD. Mapping of transcription start points revealed two divergent sigma A-controlled promoters. Although tagD and the neighbouring downstream gene tagE are transcribed from the same promoter, the latter was expressed at a much lower level than the former. Moreover, expression of tagE, and of the translationally coupled tagF, did not increase at the onset of the stationary phase, indicating that additional regulatory signals may act in the intergenic tagD-tagE region. Optimal transcription of these operons appears to require the entire regulatory region, suggesting that tag gene expression may, among other factors, be regulated by the three-dimensional configuration of this segment. The biological implications of these results are discussed.    The genus Clostridium, represented by Gram-positive, anaerobic, spore-forming bacteria, is well known for its clinical importance and considerable biotechnological potential. Recently, evidence for a functional role of the transcription factors sigma A, sigma E, sigma G, and sigma K in this genus was provided by cloning and sequencing these genes from C. acetobutylicum. In C. kluyveri, a partially sequenced open reading frame was found to encode the N terminus of the putative sigma factor L with significant similarity to members of the sigma 54 family. The identification of sequences with high similarity to the Bacillus sigma F (C. acetobutylicum), sigma H (several clostridial species), and sigma D (C. thermocellum)-controlled consensus promoters renders the existence of these transcription factors in clostridia very likely. These data are in agreement with information obtained by RNA transcript mapping (sigma A, sigma H), heterologous DNA hybridization (sigma D, sigma H), and immuno characterization of purified proteins (sigma A) from various clostridial species. Thus, the picture emerges that a fundamental similarity exists at the genetic level between the regulation of various cellular responses, in particular sporulation, in the genera Bacillus and Clostridium. The different induction patterns of sporulation in Bacillus spp. (nutrient starvation) and many clostridial species (cessation of growth or exposure to oxygen in the presence of excess nutrients) are most interestingly not reflected in the general regulatory features of this developmental process.    The Bacillus subtilis gltAB genes, coding for the two subunits of glutamate synthase, are transcribed divergently from the gltC gene, encoding a LysR-type transcriptional activator of gltAB. The predicted gltA and gltC transcription start sites are separated by 51 to 52 bp. A 15-bp, consensus binding site (Box I) for LysR-type proteins was found centered at position -64 with respect to the gltA transcription start. This site was shown by mutational analysis to be required both for GltC-mediated activation of gltA and for autorepression of gltC. Box II, which is similar to Box I, is centered 22 bp downstream of Box I and overlaps the -35 region of the gltA promoter. Box II was found to be essential for activation of gltA but not for gltC autoregulation. Introduction of approximately one additional helical turn of DNA between Box I and Box II enhanced gltA expression 7- to 40-fold under nonactivating conditions and about 2-fold under activating conditions. Expression of gltA was dramatically decreased when the distance between Box I and Box II was altered by a nonintegral number of helical turns of DNA. gltC autorepression was abolished by most of the inserts between Box I and Box II but was augmented by adding one helical turn.    A sigma B-dependent stress gene of Bacillus subtilis was localized downstream of the licS gene. The predicted amino acid sequence exhibited a significant similarity to the sequence of the katE-encoded catalase HPII of Escherichia coli, and we designated it the open reading frame katE. In a B. subtilis katE mutant, catalase 2 could not be detected. The amount of katE-specific mRNA was increased after heat, salt, or ethanol stress or after glucose starvation in a sigma B-dependent manner. As in E. coli, the transcription of the katE gene in B. subtilis was unaffected by the addition of H2O2 to exponentially growing cells. In contrast, the katA gene encoding catalase 1 of B. subtilis showed an induction pattern different from that of katE; katA expression was strongly increased by oxidative stress. The similarity between E. coli sigma S-dependent genes and B. subtilis sigma B-dependent genes suggests that both may confer multiple stress resistance to stationary-phase cells.    DNA sequencing of a region upstream of the mms223 gene of Bacillus subtilis showed the presence of two open reading frames, orf1 and orf2, which may encode 18- and 27-kDa polypeptides, respectively. The predicted amino acid sequence of the latter shows high similarity to a major autolysin of B. subtilis, CwlB, with 35% identity over 191 residues, as well as to other autolysins (CwlC, CwlM, and AmiB). The gene was tentatively named cwlD. Bright spores produced by a B. subtilis mutant with an insertionally inactivated cwlD gene were committed to germination by the addition of L-alanine, and spore darkening, a slow and partial decrease in A580, and 72% dipicolinic acid release compared with that of the wild-type strain were observed. However, degradation of the cortex was completely blocked. Spore germination of the cwlD mutant measured by colony formation after heat treatment was less than 3.7 x 10(-8). The germination deficiency of the cwlD mutant was only partially removed when the spores were treated with lysozyme. Analysis of the chromosomal transcription of cwlD demonstrated that a transcript (RNA2) appearing 3 h after initiation of sporulation may have originated from an internal sigma E-dependent promoter of the cwlD operon, and a longer transcript (RNA1) appearing 4.5 h after sporulation may have originated from a sigma G-dependent promoter upstream of the orf1 gene. The cwlD mutant harboring a B. subtilis vector plasmid containing the intact cwlD gene recovered germination at a frequency 26% of the wild-type level.    The xyl operons of several gram-positive bacteria are regulated at the level of transcription by xylose-responsive repressor proteins (XylR). In addition, they are catabolite repressed. Here, we describe a mechanism by which glucose metabolism can affect both regulatory mechanisms. Glucose-6-phosphate appeared to be an anti-inducer of xyl operon transcription, since it could compete with xylose in interaction in vitro with XylR from Bacillus subtilis, B. megaterium, and B. licheniformis. On the other hand, glucose was a low-efficiency inactivator of XylR from B. subtilis and B. megaterium and a weak anti-inducer of XylR from B. licheniformis. Thus, the chemical nature of the substituent at C-5 of xylose and the primary structure of XylR determine the effect of these compounds on xyl operon transcription.    To study the regulatory mechanism controlling the heat-inducible expression of Bacillus subtilis groE, two regulatory elements, the sigma A-like promoter and the inverted repeat (IR [CIRCE]) in the control region, were characterized. The groE promoter was shown to be transcribed by the major RNA polymerase under both heat shock and non-heat shock conditions. The IR was found to have two functions. (i) It ensures the fast turnover of the groE transcript, and (ii) it serves as an operator. This IR acts as a negative heat shock regulatory element, since deletion of this sequence resulted in high-level expression of groE even at 37 degrees C. Although this IR is present in the 5&apos; untranslated region of the groE transcript, groE transcripts under heat shock and non-heat shock conditions showed similar in vivo half-lives of 5 min. This rapid turnover at 37 degrees C requires the presence of the IR. Without the IR, the groE transcript showed a longer half-life of 17 min. Increasing the distance between the groE transcription start site and the IR systematically by inserting nucleotide sequences from 5 to 21 bp in length resulted in a gradual abolition of the negative regulatory effect mediated by the IR. This effect was not due to a significant change in transcript stability or the transcription start site and is consistent with the model that this IR serves as an operator.    A series of gusA transcriptional fusion vectors is described for Bacillus subtilis (Bs). The series includes a vector for use with the amyE system of Shimotsu and Henner [Gene 43 (1986) 85-94], an integrative vector and vectors that provide gusA or gusA neo cassettes. The gusA fusions are compatible with lacZ fusion vectors that are widely used with Bs, and gusA and lacZ fusions are expressed at similar levels. beta-Glucuronidase (beta Glu) and beta-galactosidase (beta Gal) do not exhibit any cross-reactivity, there is very little endogenous beta Glu activity in Bs, and there is no indication of mutation to high-level expression. We have use strains containing both gusA and lacZ fusions to compare the times of expression of different genes during sporulation.    The Bacillus subtilis gnt operon is negatively regulated via interaction of the gnt repressor (GntR) with an operator upstream of gntR, which is antagonized by gluconate. An 8 bp insertional operator mutation (gntOi) of the gnt operon was constructed which affected the expression level of this operon. Two suppressors of this gntOi mutation, exhibiting normal expression, were also isolated; one involved a threonine substitution for the Ala-48 residue (gntR48T) within the helix-turn-helix DNA-binding motif of GntR, and the other an adenine substitution for the guanine at nucleotide -4 within the gntOi operator (gntOiM4A) (+ 1 is the transcription initiation site). The gntR48T mutation by itself rendered the gnt operon partially constitutive. When the gntR43L mutation, which renders the gnt operon fully constitutive, was introduced into the gntOi or gntOiM4A mutant, the operator mutations were found not to affect the promoter activity of the gnt operon. These in vivo results indicate that the gntOi mutation affects the operator interaction with GntR, causing a low expression level even in the presence of gluconate. In vitro gel retardation and DNase I footprint analyses demonstrated that even when gluconate was present, GntR still bound to the gntOi operator region.    RNA polymerase from Bacillus subtilis is a complex mixture comprising a common core (beta beta&apos; alpha 2), the 20.4 kDa delta (delta) protein, and of one of several sigma (sigma) specificity factors. The delta protein, together with several truncated variants, has been overproduced and purified from Escherichia coli. It is highly acidic (pI = 3.6) and contains two distinct regions, a 13 kDa amino-terminal domain with fairly uniform charge distribution and a glutamate and aspartate residue-rich carboxyl-terminal region. The purified amino-terminal domain (delta N) contains 32% alpha-helix and 16% beta-sheet, as judged by circular dichroism analysis. In contrast, an 8.5 kDa tryptic fragment containing the carboxyl-terminal region (delta C) is largely unstructured and highly charged (net charge of -47). RNA polymerase purified from a B. subtilis mutant with an insertion in the delta gene (rpoE::cat) contains a truncated delta protein, indicating that the amino-terminal domain is stable in vivo and contains a core-binding function. Addition of delta, but not sigma A or delta N, displaces RNA bound to RNA polymerase in a binary complex. The ability of delta to displace RNA efficiently requires the activities of both the amino-terminal core-binding domain and the polyanionic carboxyl-terminal region. Although delta C can also displace nucleic acids from RNA polymerase, this activity requires the addition of a large molar excess of protein and is relatively non specific in that both DNA and RNA are displaced. This suggests that the function of the amino-terminal domain is to bind and orient the carboxyl-terminal region on the surface of RNA polymerase.    Catabolite repression of various Bacillus subtilis catabolic operons which carry a cis-acting catabolite-responsive element (CRE), such as the gnt operon, is mediated by CcpA, a protein belonging to the GalR-Lacl family of bacterial transcriptional repressors/activators, and the seryl-phosphorylated form of HPr, a phosphocarrier protein of the phosphoenolpyruvate:sugar phosphotransferase system. Footprinting experiments revealed that the purified CcpA protein interacted with P-ser-HPr to cause specific protection of the gnt CRE against DNase I digestion. The specific recognition of the gnt CRE was confirmed by the results of footprinting experiments using mutant gnt CREs carrying one of the following base substitutions within the CRE consensus sequence: G to T at position +149 or C to T at position +154 (+1 is the gnt transcription initiation nucleotide). The two mutant CREs causing a partial relief from catabolite repression were not protected by the CcpA/P-ser-HPr complex in footprinting experiments. Based on these and previous findings, we propose a molecular mechanism underlying catabolite repression in B. subtilis mediated by CcpA and P-ser-HPr.    The gene encoding the beta subunit of Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase was isolated from a lambda gt11 expression library using an antibody probe. Gene identity was confirmed by the similarity of its predicted product to the Escherichia coli beta subunit and by mapping an alteration conferring rifampicin resistance within the conserved rif coding region. Including the rif region, four colinear blocks of sequence similarity were shared between the B. subtilis and E. coli beta subunits. In E. coli, these conserved blocks are separated by three regions that either were not conserved or were entirely absent from the B. subtilis protein. The B. subtilis beta gene was part of a cluster with the order rplL (encoding ribosomal protein L7/L12), orf23 (encoding a 22,513-dalton protein that is apparently essential for growth), rpoB (beta), and rpoC (beta&apos;). This organization differs from the corresponding region in E. coli by the inclusion of orf23. Experiments using promoter probe vectors and site-directed mutagenesis located a major rpoB promoter overlapping the 3&apos;-coding region of orf23, 250 nucleotides upstream from the beta initiation codon. Thus, the B. subtilis rpoB region differs from its E. coli counterpart in both genetic and transcriptional organization.    The Bacillus subtilis mrgA gene encodes an abundant DNA-binding protein that protects cells against the lethal effects of H2O2. Transcription of mrgA is induced by H2O2 or by entry into stationary phase when manganese and iron levels are low. We have selected for strains derepressed for transcription of mrgA in the presence of Mn(II). The resulting cis-acting mutants define an operator site just upstream of the mrgA promoter. Similar sequences flank the promoters for the catalase gene, katA, and the heme biosynthesis operon, hemAXCDBL. Like mrgA, transcription of the katA and hem genes is repressed by Mn(II), which thereby potentiates the killing action of H2O2. We identified two classes of trans-acting mutants derepressed for mrgA transcription in the presence of Mn(II): some exhibit a coordinate derepression of MrgA, catalase, heme biosynthesis, and alkyl hydroperoxide reductase and are H2O2 resistant, while others have reduced catalase activity and are H2O2 sensitive. These data indicate that the peroxide stress response of B. subtilis is regulated by a repressor that senses both metal ion levels and H2O2.    In Bacillus subtilis, the AhrC protein represses genes encoding enzymes of arginine biosynthesis and activates those mediating its catabolism. To determine how this repressor also functions as an activator, we attempted to clone catabolic genes by searching for insertions of the Tn917-lacZ transposon that express AhrC-dependent, arginine-inducible beta-galactosidase activity. One such isolate was obtained. The region upstream of lacZ was subcloned in Escherichia coli in such a way that it could be replaced in the B. subtilis chromosome after appropriate manipulation. Analysis of exonuclease III-derived deletions located an AhrC-dependent, arginine-inducible promoter to within a ca. 1.9 kb fragment. The sequence revealed: the 3&apos; end of an ORF homologous to gdh genes encoding glutamate dehydrogenase, with highest homology to the homologue from Clostridium difficile; the 5&apos; end of an ORF homologous to a Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene encoding delta 1-pyrroline 5-carboxylate dehydrogenase (P5CDH), an enzyme of arginine catabolism; and just upstream of the latter, a sequence with homology to known AhrC binding sites in the upstream part of the biosynthetic argCJBD-cpa-F cluster. The same region has also been sequenced by others as part of the B. subtilis genome sequencing project, revealing that the P5CDH gene is the first in a cluster termed rocABC. Restriction fragments containing the putative AhrC-binding sequence, but not those lacking it, showed retarded electrophoretic mobility in the presence of purified AhrC. A 277 bp AhrC-binding fragment also showed anomalous mobility in the absence of AhrC, consistent with its being intrinsically bent. DNAse I footprinting localized AhrC binding to bp -16/-22 to +1 (the transcription startpoint). Such a location for an activator binding site, i.e. overlapping the transcription start, is unusual.    The trp RNA-binding attenuation protein of Bacillus subtilis, TRAP, regulates both transcription and translation by binding to specific transcript sequences. The optimal transcript sequences required for TRAP binding were determined by measuring complex formation between purified TRAP protein and synthetic RNAs. RNAs were tested that contained repeats of different trinucleotide sequences, with differing spacing between the repeats. A transcript containing GAG repeats separated by two-nucleotide spacers was bound most tightly. In addition, transmission electron microscopy was used to examine the structure of TRAP and the TRAP-transcript complex. TRAP was observed to be a toroid-shaped oligomer when free or when bound to either a natural or a synthetic RNA.    The Bacillus subtilis glnR gene (part of the glnRA operon) encodes a 135-amino-acid (aa) repressor, GlnR, that regulates glnRA transcription in response to nitrogen levels in the growth medium. Two glnR mutants unable to repress under nitrogen excess conditions were obtained by mutagenesis. Lesions were found at Leu77 and Ala80, aa that lie within a region (between aa 59-83) thought to form the alpha-helix-turn-alpha-helix (HTH) motif common among a class of regulatory proteins. Alteration of Gly72 by site-directed mutagenesis also affected regulation, suggesting that aa within the putative HTH region are critical for GlnR function and may be involved in DNA binding. However, other replacements within the aa 59-83 sequence failed to support the HTH structure proposed for this region. Mutations within the C-terminal region of GlnR were also found to affect regulation. Introduction of an ochre stop codon at aa 110, 116, 123 and 129 resulted in the production of truncated proteins that were constitutively repressed, strongly suggesting that a signal recognition site residues within the last seven aa of GlnR. Substituting Asp129 with Asn led to loss of repression, indicating that Asp129 may be directly involved in interacting with either positive or negative effector molecules, or is a target for post-translational modification.    Analysis of a 1.3-kilobase segment of 5&apos;-flanking DNA from the barbiturate-inducible P450BM-1 gene (CYP106) of Bacillus megaterium revealed two open reading frames. One, BM1P1, encodes 98 amino acids and is located 267 base pairs upstream from the sequence encoding cytochrome P450BM-1 but in the opposite orientation. The second, BM1P2 (88 amino acids), is 892 base pairs upstream from the P450BM-1 coding sequence and in the same coding strand. The expression of BM1P1 and BM1P2 was strongly stimulated in cells grown in the presence of pentobarbital, and the BM1P1 gene product exerted positive control on expression of P450BM-1. When a 177-base pair fragment encompassing the overlapping promoter regions of the P450BM-1 and BM1P1 genes was used as a probe in DNA binding assays, the BM1P1 and BM1P2 gene products and Bm3R1 (the repressor protein regulating the barbiturate-mediated expression of P450BM-3) could bind individually, but the addition of BM1P1 or BM1P2 to a binding mixture containing Bm3R1 completely prevented the appearance of a Bm3R1 binding band. When a 208-base pair fragment containing a Barbie box sequence and located upstream of the 177-base pair fragment was used as a probe, only a Bm3R1 binding band was detected. Although neither BM1P1 and BM1P2 appeared to bind to this 208-base pair fragment, their presence strongly inhibited the binding of Bm3R1 to the same probe. The evidence suggests that BM1P1 and BM1P2 may, in part, act as positive regulatory proteins involved in the expression of the P450BM-1 gene by interfering with the binding of the repressor protein, Bm3R1, to the regulatory regions of P450BM-1.    We previously reported (Liang, Q., He, J.-S., and Fulco, A.J. (1995) J. Biol. Chem. 270, 4438-4450) that Bm3R1, a repressor regulating the expression of P450BM-3 in Bacillus megaterium, could bind to Barbie box sequences in the 5&apos;-flanking regions of barbiturate-inducible genes. We&apos;ve now shown that pentobarbital does not inhibit in vitro binding of Bm3R1 to the P450BM-3 and P450BM-1 Barbie boxes (BB3 and BB1), although the palindromic operator sequence (OIII) of P450BM-3 did have a strong competitive effect on such binding. G39E-Bm3R1, a mutant of Bm3R1, did not bind to either Barbie box. In the presence of Bm3R1, portions of the regulatory regions of P450BM-3 and P450BM-1 were protected from DNase I digestion. These included 11 of the 15 base pairs of BB3 plus 7 base pairs 3&apos; to BB3, BB1 plus 16 base pairs 3&apos; to BB1, and, in the 5&apos;-flanking region of P450BM-1, segments covering most of two palindromic sequences (OII and OIII) of 24 and 52 base pairs. These DNase I-protected regions (including OIII) showed considerable sequence identity, especially in a conserved poly(A) motif. Barbiturates did not inhibit binding of Bm3R1 to OI.OII in vitro while G39E-Bm3R1 did not bind. The regulatory effects of Bm3R1 on P450BM-1 and P450BM-3 were also evaluated in vivo using heterologous chloramphenicol acetyltransferase constructs and Western blotting. In the G39E mutant strain, both P450BM-1 and P450BM-3 were constitutively expressed, and the regulatory proteins Bm1P1 and Bm3P1, although still pentobarbital-inducible, had significantly higher basal levels of synthesis. In toto, our results show that Bm3R1 represses both P450BM-1 and P450BM-3 expression and that it may effect this by coordinate binding to operator and Barbie box sequences to produce looping of the P450BM-1 and P450BM-3 regulatory regions through protein-protein interaction.    Transcriptional studies have demonstrated that the dnaK gene of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) is contained within a 4.3 kb operon. The operon is transcribed from a single (transiently) heat-inducible promoter, dnaKp, that resembles the typical vegetative (sigma 70-recognized) eubacterial consensus promoter sequence. dnaK transcription was found to be heat-inducible at all stages of development in surface-grown cultures. In addition, at the normal growth temperature of 30 degrees C, dnaK transcript levels were shown to vary at different stages of development, being more abundant in young germinating cultures and in mycelium undergoing sporogenesis. The nucleotide sequence of the dnaK operon has been completed, revealing the gene organization 5&apos;dnaK-grpE-dnaJ orfX. orfX represents a novel heat-shock gene. Its predicted product displays high similarity to the GlnR repressor proteins of Bacillus spp. and to the MerR family of eubacterial transcriptional regulators. The S. coelicolor OrfX protein has been over-produced in Escherichia coli, and DNA-binding experiments indicate that it interacts specifically with the dnaKp region, binding to three partially related inverted repeat sequences; they are centered at -75, -49 and +4, respectively, relative to the transcription start site of the operon. These results suggest that OrfX plays a direct role in the regulation of the dnaK operon.    Cp-1 is a small virulent bacteriophage infecting Streptococcus pneumoniae. It has a linear, double-stranded genome of about 19 kb that replicates by a protein-priming mechanism. We have determined the nucleotide sequence of the leftmost 4780 bp of the DNA of this bacteriophage; computer analysis revealed that this fragment contains seven open reading frames (ORFs) which could encode polypeptides containing more than 50 amino acids. The ORFs are clustered in two groups separated by noncoding intergenic regions. Two of these ORFs code for the terminal protein and a specific DNA polymerase that participate in the replication of the DNA. The predicted amino acid sequence of the terminal protein shows significant similarity with the terminal protein of Bacillus subtilis phage phi 29, and Cp-1 DNA polymerase is homologous to the subgroup of eukaryotic-type DNA polymerases that use a protein as a primer. Combined Northern blots and primer extension experiments have allowed us to map the 5&apos; initiation sites of left early transcripts. These studies revealed that transcripts elongate from left to right and identified the left early promoters.    Activation of pro-sigma K processing in the mother cell at late stages of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis requires the presence of active sigma G in the forespore. Placing the spoIVB gene under the control of sigma F, the early forespore transcription factor, allows sigma K to become active in the absence of sigma G. Therefore, transcription of spoIVB is the only role of sigma G that is essential for the signaling pathway between sigma G and sigma K.    SinR is a pleiotropic DNA binding protein that is essential for the late-growth processes of competence and motility in Bacillus subtilis and is also a repressor of others, e.g., sporulation and subtilisin synthesis. In this report, we show that SinR, in addition to being an inhibitor of sporulation stage II gene expression, is a repressor of the key early sporulation gene spo0A. The sporulation-specific rise in spo0A expression at time zero is absent in a SinR-overproducing strain and is much higher than normal in strains with a disrupted sinR gene. This effect is direct, since SinR binds specifically to spo0A in vitro, in a region overlapping the -10 region of the sporulation-specific Ps promoter that is recognized by E-sigma H polymerase. Methyl interference and site-directed mutagenesis studies have identified guanine residues that are important for SinR recognition of this DNA sequence. Finally, we present evidence that SinR controls sporulation through several independent genes, i.e., sp0A, spoIIA, and possibly spoIIG and spoIIE.    Transcription of the Bacillus subtilis pur operon is repressed in response to a signal of excess adenine. We have purified the repressor protein and have identified, cloned, and overexpressed the purR regulatory gene that controls transcription initiation of the operon. B. subtilis purR encodes a 62-kDa homodimer that binds to the pur operon control region. The PurR binding site which overlaps the promoter encompasses approximately 110 bp. The protein-DNA interaction is inhibited by 5-phosphoribosyl 1-pyrophosphate. A mutation that deletes the repressor binding site or one that disrupts purR abolishes binding activity in vitro and repression of transcription in vivo in response to the excess adenine signal. These results lead to a model in which an excess-adenine signal is transmitted to PurR via the 5-phosphoribosyl 1-pyrophosphate pool. In addition, purR is autoregulated. There is no structural or mechanistic similarity between the B. subtilis and Escherichia coli purine repressors.    AbrB is a transcriptional regulator of many Bacillus subtilis genes. A number of AbrB-binding sites have previously been delimited by DNase I footprinting studies, but the heterogeneity of the protected sequences and sizes has not led to a determination of a possible consensus motif for recognition. We have examined the affinity of AbrB for binding to six known target regions when the regions were placed in DNA fragments of various sizes. The sites are shown to vary dramatically in AbrB-binding affinity when they are present in smaller fragments, but the differences are smaller when the affinities of larger fragments are compared. Additional observations that indicate that AbrB binding may be a multistep cooperative process are reported.    Transcriptional analyses of the Bacillus subtilis sporulation initiator gene spo0A revealed that promoter switching from the vegetative (Pv) to the sporulation-specific (Ps) promoter did not occur in the spo0A, spo0B, spo0E, spo0F, and spo0H mutants. The sof-1 mutation in spo0A restored the promoter switching in the spo0F mutant. These results strongly suggest that Spo0A plays a central role in the regulation of its own promoter switching.    trpG of Bacillus subtilis encodes a glutamine amidotransferase subunit that is involved in the synthesis of both folic acid and L-tryptophan. Expression of trpG is negatively regulated by tryptophan even though this gene is located within a folic acid biosynthetic operon. Examination of both transcriptional and translational gene fusions to lacZ involving trpG and direct measurements of trpG mRNA levels and TrpG polypeptide accumulation demonstrated that translation of trpG is regulated by tryptophan whereas transcription is not. these studies also show that this regulation is mediated by the trp RNA-binding attenuation protein. Deletion and point mutations indicated that regulation is dependent on a series of G/UAG trinucleotide repeats surrounding the putative ribosome-binding site for trpG. Our results are consistent with a model in which the tryptophan-activated trp RNA-binding attenuation protein and ribosomes compete for binding to trpG mRNA.    The expression of the gsiB gene of Bacillus subtilis in response to a wide variety of stress conditions was analysed, and the results provide evidence that gsiB is subject to a sigma B-dependent regulation. Primer extension experiments established identical start points for gsiB transcription during growth and after the induction by heat shock, salt or ethanol stress, and glucose limitation. The sequence upstream of the transcription start point shows great similarity to the sequences of sigma B-dependent promoters of B. subtilis. sigma B was absolutely required for the increase in gsiB mRNA level and in the synthesis rate of GsiB in response to various stimuli. Measurements of the ATP pool indicated that changes in the level of ATP might be one of the signals that regulate the activity of sigma B in B. subtilis.    Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase (RNAP) contains a catalytic core (beta beta&apos; alpha 2; or E) associated with one of several sigma factors, which determine promoter recognition, and delta protein, which enhances promoter selectivity. We have shown previously that specific mutations in sigma A region 2.3, or addition of delta, decrease the ability of RNAP to melt the ilv-leu promoter. Here we extend these studies to a stable RNA promoter, PtmS, which controls transcription of seven tRNA genes. KMnO4 footprinting was used to visualize DNA melting at PtmS as a function of both temperature and the protein composition of the RNAP holoenzyme. We propose that the pathway leading to productive initiation includes several intermediates: a closed complex (RPc), a complex in which DNA melting has nucleated within the conserved TATA element (RPn), and an open complex in which DNA-melting extends to at least -4 (RPo1). RNAP reconstituted with either of two mutant sigma A proteins, Y189A and W192A, was defective for both the nucleation and propagation of the transcription bubble while a third sigma A mutant, W193A, allows normal nucleation of DNA-melting, but does not efficiently propagate the melted region downstream.    Uroporphyrinogen III synthase, the product of the hemD gene, is the enzyme responsible for the cyclisation of the linear tetrapyrrole, hydroxymethylbilane. The hemD gene isolated from Bacillus subtilis was manipulated by PCR to enable direct cloning behind a synthetic ribosome-binding site downstream of tandem bacteriophage lambda PR and PL promoters in a pCE30-derived vector. Following thermal induction of transcription, the resulting plasmid (pPS21) directed the synthesis of uroporphyrinogen III synthase. The protein produced was soluble and was readily purified. Pure uroporphyrinogen III synthase is monomeric with an isoelectric point of 4.1 and an optimum pH for activity of 8.3. Its specific activity by assay using synthetic hydroxymethylbilane as substrate is 565 units mg-1 and the Km for this substrate is 330 +/- 30 nM. The N-terminal sequence of the enzyme is Met-Glu-Asn-Asp-Phe-Pro-Leu, in agreement with the gene-derived sequence. Studies based on amino acid modifications suggest that arginine, lysine and probably histidine residues are essential for the activity of uroporphyrinogen III synthase. Significantly, this synthase from B. subtilis is substantially more thermostable than the enzymes from previously studied sources.    The ftsH gene of Bacillus subtilis has been identified as a salt-sensitive insertion mutation in strain UG1. Here, we show that UG1 has an insertion near the 3&apos; end of ftsH. The salt sensitivity of this mutant was caused by reduction of ftsH mRNA levels by the synthesis of an artificial antisense RNA originating at a promoter located within the insertion and reading backwards into the ftsH gene. The salt-sensitive phenotype could be overcome by deleting the promoter from which the antisense RNA was transcribed. A physiological analysis of the isogenic wild-type strain in minimal medium revealed unimpaired growth at up to 1 M NaCl, and growth above 1.2 M NaCl was observed only after addition of the osmoprotectant proline or glycine betaine. In contrast, growth of strain UG1 was reduced at a salt concentration above 0.2 M, which could be rescued by the two compatible solutes already mentioned and also by trehalose. Primer extension revealed one potential transcription start site downstream of a putative vegetative promoter, which was activated after osmotic or temperature upshift. Northern (RNA blot) experiments led to the detection of a 2.1-kb transcript, suggesting that ftsH is monocistronic. A transcriptional fusion between ftsH and the gus reporter gene exhibited a twofold increase in beta-glucuronidase activity after osmotic upshift. To further confirm the need for an enhanced level of FtsH protein after osmotic upshift, the promoter was replaced by the sucrose-inducible promoter PsacB. Whereas this mutant strain could grow in the absence of inducer in LB medium, it stopped growth immediately after addition of 1.1 M NaCl.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    The Bacillus subtilis genome encodes two multidrug efflux transporters sharing 51% sequence identity: Bmr, described previously, and Blt, described here. Overexpression of either transporter in B. subtilis leads to a similar increase in resistance to ethidium bromide, rhodamine and acridine dyes, tetraphenylphosphonium, doxorubicin, and fluoroquinolone antibiotics. However, Blt differs widely from Bmr in its expression pattern. Under standard cultivation conditions, B. subtilis expresses Bmr but Blt expression is undetectable. We have previously shown that Bmr expression is regulated by BmrR, a member of the family of MerR-like transcriptional activators. Here we show that blt transcription is regulated by another member of the same family, BltR. The DNA-binding domains of BmrR and BltR are related, but their putative inducer-binding domains are dissimilar, suggesting that Bmr and Blt are expressed in response to different inducers. Indeed, rhodamine, a substrate of Bmr and Blt and a known inducer of Bmr expression, does not induce Blt expression. Blt expression has been observed only in B. subtilis, carrying mutation acfA, which, as we show here, alters the sequence of the blt gene promoter. Unlike bmr, which is transcribed as a monocistronic mRNA, blt is cotranscribed with a downstream gene encoding a putative acetyltransferase. Overall, the differences in transcriptional control and operon organization between bmr and blt suggest that the transporters encoded by these genes have independent functions involving the transport of distinct physiological compounds.    The 30-kDa sporulation-specific peptidoglycan hydrolase CwlC of Bacillus subtilis 168 was purified and characterized. It is an N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanine amidase (amidase) that is associated with the mother cell wall of sporulating cells, and although it is secreted, it undergoes no N-terminal processing except removal of the initial methionine. It was found that mother cells of a strain insertionally inactivated in cwlC and lytC (the major vegetative amidase gene) did not lyse at the end of sporulation. Mutants with single mutations in cwlC or lytC lysed, and so the two autolysins must have mutually compensatory roles in mother cell lysis. Active CwlC and LytC are present at the time of mother cell lysis; however, reporter gene analysis revealed that lytC transcription ceases early in sporulation, and therefore the function that LytC has in mother cell lysis is performed by material remaining from presporulation expression. Autolytic enzymes similar in molecular mass to CwlC were detected in two other Bacillus species by their cross-reactivity with anti-CwlC antiserum.    sigma B is a secondary sigma factor that controls the general stress response of Bacillus subtilis. sigma B-dependent transcription is induced by the activation of sigma B itself, a process that involves release of sigma B from an inhibitory complex with its primary regulator, RsbW. sigma B becomes available to RNA polymerase when RsbW forms a complex with an additional regulatory protein (RsbV) and, because of this, fails to bind sigma B. Using Western blot (immunoblot) analyses, reporter gene fusion assays, and measurements of nucleotide pool sizes, we provide evidence for two independent processes that promote the binding of RsbW to RsbV. The first occurs during carbon limitation or entry into stationary phase. Activation of sigma B under these circumstances correlates with a drop in the intracellular levels of ATP and may be a direct consequence of ATP levels on RsbW&apos;s binding preference. The second activation process relies on the product of a third regulatory gene, rsbU. RsbU is dispensable for sigma B activation during carbon limitation or stationary phase but is needed for activation of sigma B in response to any of a number of different environmental insults (ethanol treatment, salt or acid shock, etc.). RsbU, or a process dependent on it, alters RsbW binding without regard for intracellular levels of ATP. In at least some instances, the effects of multiple inducing stimuli are additive. The data are consistent with RsbW being a regulator at which distinct signals from separate effectors can be integrated to modulate sigma B activity.    spo0H encodes a sigma factor, sigma-H, of RNA polymerase that is required for sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. Null mutations in spo0H block the initiation of sporulation but have no obvious effect on vegetative growth. We have characterized an insertion mutation, csh203::Tn917lac, that makes spo0H essential for normal growth. In otherwise wild-type cells, the csh203::Tn917lac insertion mutation has no obvious effect on cell growth, viability, or sporulation. However, in combination with a mutation in spo0H, the csh203 mutation causes a defect in vegetative growth. The csh203::Tn917lac insertion mutation was found to be located within orf23, the first gene of the rpoD (sigma-A) operon. The transposon insertion separates the major vegetative promoters P1 and P2 from the coding regions of two essential genes, dnaG (encoding DNA primase) and rpoD (encoding the major sigma factor, sigma-A) and leaves these genes under the control of minor promoters, including P4, a promoter controlled by sigma-H. The chs203 insertion mutation caused a 2- to 10-fold increase in expression of promoters recognized by RNA polymerase containing sigma-H. The increased expression of genes controlled by sigma-H in the csh203 single mutant, as well as the growth defect of the csh203 spo0H double mutant, was due to effects on rpoD and not to a defect in orf23 or dnaG.    The transcriptional regulator Spo0A activates transcription from two types of promoters. One type of promoter is used by RNA polymerase containing sigma A, whereas the other type is used by RNA polymerase containing sigma H. There are Spo0A-binding sites near the -35 region of both types of promoters. It has been reported that some transcriptional regulators that bind near the -35 regions of promoters directly interact with the sigma subunit of RNA polymerase. Therefore, we looked for evidence that Spo0A interacts with both sigma factors by searching for single amino acid substitutions in these factors that specifically prevent expression from Spo0A-dependent promoters, but that do not decrease activity of Spo0A-independent promoters. Two such amino acid substitutions were isolated in sigma A and one was isolated in sigma H. The amino acid substitutions in sigma A prevented expression from the Spo0A-activated promoters, spoIIG and spoIIE, but expression was not impaired from the Spo0A-independent, sigma A-dependent promoter tms or from the Spo0A-activated, sigma H-dependent promoter, spoIIA. The amino acid substitution in sigma H prevented expression from the spoIIA promoter but not from the Spo0A-independent promoter, citGp2, which is used by sigma H-RNA polymerase. All of these amino acid substitutions occur in the carboxyl terminus of the sigma factors. These amino acid substitutions may define the sites of contact between the sigma factors and Spo0A. The ability of response regulators such as Spo0A to interact with multiple sigma factors may increase the variety of responses made by bacteria using a limited number of transcription factors.    The promoter (amyP) of the Bacillus subtilis alpha-amylase gene, which is recognized by E sigma A, has a three out of six match to the consensus promoter in both the -35 and -10 hexamers. Oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis was used to identify important bases for promoter utilization in the spacer sequence between the hexamers. Mutations in the sequence TGTG extending from positions -18 to -15 (the -16 region) caused a 5-94-fold decrease in alpha-amylase production. A G-C transversion at position -15 was the most detrimental mutation: it essentially eliminated amyP utilization in B. subtilis and in Escherichia coli. Mutating the -35 and -10 hexamers to the E sigma A consensus promoter increased alpha-amylase production 56-fold in B. subtilis and fivefold in E. coli. Introducing the -15 G to C transversion into the consensus promoter reduced alpha-amylase production threefold, in contrast to the 94-fold reduction for the wild-type promoter in B. subtilis. The -15 G to C transversion did not reduce alpha-amylase synthesis directed by the consensus promoter in E. coli. The alpha-amylase gene is subject to two forms of transcriptional regulation: catabolite repression and temporal regulation. None of the mutants constructed in this study had any effect on either type of regulation. The -16 region, especially the G at position -15, appears to be moderately conserved in B. subtilis and in other Gram-positive organisms and weakly conserved in E. coli. The evidence suggests that the -16 region is an additional region of E sigma A promoters in B. subtilis and E sigma 70 promoters in E. coli, essential in some weak promoters such as the alpha-amylase promoter but, of little benefit to very strong promoters.    The Bacillus subtilis dlt operon (D-alanyl-lipoteichoic acid) is responsible for D-alanine esterification of both lipoteichoic acid (LTA) and wall teichoic acid (WTA). The dlt operon contains five genes, dltA-dltE. Insertional inactivation of dltA-dltD results in complete absence of D-alanine from both LTA and WTA. Based on protein sequence similarity with the Lactobacillus casei dlt gene products (Heaton, M. P., and Neuhaus, F. C. (1992) J. Bacteriol. 174, 4707-4717), we propose that dltA encodes the D-alanine-D-alanyl carrier protein ligase (Dcl) and dltC the D-alanyl carrier protein (Dcp). We further hypothesize that the products of dltB and dltD are concerned with the transport of activated D-alanine through the membrane and the final incorporation of D-alanine into LTA. The hydropathy profiles of the dltB and dltD gene products suggest a transmembrane location for the former and an amino-terminal signal peptide for the latter. The incorporation of D-alanine into LTA and WTA did not separate in any of the mutants studied which indicates that either one and the same enzyme is responsible for D-alanine incorporation into both polymers or a separate enzyme, encoded outside the dlt operon, transfers the D-alanyl residues from LTA to WTA (Haas, R., Koch, H.-U., and Fischer, W. (1984) FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 21, 27-31). Inactivation of dltE has no effect on D-alanine ester content of both LTA and WTA, and at present we cannot propose any function for its gene product. Transcription analysis shows that the dlt operon is transcribed from a sigma D-dependent promoter and follows the pattern of transcription of genes belonging to the sigma D regulon. However, the turn off of transcription observed before sporulation starts seems to be dependent on the Spo0A and AbrB sporulation proteins and results in a D-alanine-free purely anionic LTA in the spore membrane. The dlt operon is dispensable for cell growth; its inactivation does not affect cell growth or morphology as described for L. casei.    The Spo0A protein of Bacillus subtilis is a transcriptional regulator that shows extensive homology to the regulator proteins in bacterial two-component regulatory systems. Phosphorylation of Spo0A is absolutely necessary for the initiation of sporulation. We now show that phospho-Spo0A is a dimer, binds specifically to the spo0F promoter region, and stimulates the transcription from the P2 promoter recognized by sigma H-RNA polymerase. Biochemical and biological analyses suggest that phospho-Spo0A interacts directly with the &quot;0A-like box&quot; sequence (TGTCGTA) located in the spo0F promoter region. Phosphorylation of Spo0A enhanced its affinity to the 0A-like box. Evidence is also presented that the spo0F promoter region contains a static bend having two sets of oligo(dA-dT) tracts. It was demonstrated that the bending region overlaps with the recognition site for the phospho-Spo0A.    Three genes called rocD, rocE and rocF were found near the rocR gene in B. subtilis. The product of rocD is similar to eukaryotic ornithine aminotransferases. The product of rocE shares similarity with the product of B. subtilis rocC and with the product of E. coli lysP. The rocE gene may encode an arginine permease. The rocF gene encodes a polypeptide similar to several arginases. Heterologous expression in E. coli indicated that rocD encodes an ornithine aminotransferase and that rocF encodes an arginase. Arginine utilization was abolished in both rocD and rocF mutants of B. subtilis confirming the role of these genes in arginine catabolism. The rocDEF genes form an operon transcribed from a -12, -24 promoter almost identical to the -12, -24 promoter of the rocABC operon. The expression of the rocDEF operon was induced by the presence of arginine, ornithine or proline in the growth medium and depended on the presence of the sigma factor SigL. Transcription of this operon was also abolished in a B. subtilis strain containing a null mutation in the regulatory gene rocR. Two tandemly repeated upstream activating sequences very similar to those previously identified in the rocABC system were found centered at positions -120 and -70, respectively, upstream from the transcription start site of rocDEF. Deletion analysis showed that at least one upstream activating sequence is involved in the expression of the rocDEF operon. These sequences are probably the target of RocR. Analysis of a rocR&apos;-&apos;lacZ fusion strain showed that the expression of rocR is not induced by arginine and is negatively autoregulated.    Bacillus anthracis plasmid pXO1 carries the structural genes for the three anthrax toxin proteins, cya (edema factor), lef (lethal factor), and pag (protective antigen). Expression of the toxin genes by B. anthracis is enhanced during growth under elevated levels of CO2. This CO2 effect is observed only in the presence of another pXO1 gene, atxA, which encodes a transactivator of anthrax toxin synthesis. Here we show that transcription of atxA does not appear to differ in cells grown in 5% CO2 compared with cells grown in air. Using a new efficient method for gene replacement in B. anthracis, we constructed an atxA-null mutant in which the atxA-coding sequence on pXO1 is replaced with an omega km-2 cassette. Transcription of all three toxin genes is decreased in the absence of atxA. The pag gene possesses two apparent transcription start sites, P1 and P2; only transcripts with 5&apos; ends mapping to P1 are decreased in the atxA-null mutant. Deletion analysis of the pag promoter region indicates that the 111 bp region upstream of the P1 site is sufficient for atxA-mediated activation of this transcript. The cya and lef genes each have one apparent start site for transcription. Transcripts with 5&apos; ends mapping to these sites are not detected in the atxA-null mutant. The atxA-null mutant is avirulent in mice. Moreover, the antibody response to all three toxin proteins is decreased significantly in atxA-null mutant-infected mice. These data suggest that the atxA gene product also regulates toxin gene expression during infection.    We show that the major role for Spo0A in the development of genetic competence is to downregulate expression of abrB. AbrB is both a negative regulator and a positive regulator of competence. The negative effects are exerted at multiple points in competence regulation. A regulatory mechanism that is independent of mecA and abrB operates on comK expression.    In Bacillus subtilis, general stress proteins (Gsps) are induced in response to different stresses (heat, salt, or ethanol) or after nutrient starvation. The majority of the genes for the Gsps are organized in a very large stationary-phase or stress regulon which is controlled by alternative sigma factor sigma B. The most striking spots on Coomassie-stained two-dimensional gels belong to GsiB and GspA, which are synthesized at extremely high levels in response to different stresses. Therefore, we determined the N-terminal protein sequence of GspA, which exhibited total identity to a hypothetical 33.5-kDa protein of B. subtilis encoded by open reading frame 2 (ipa-12d) in the sacY-tyrS1 intergenic region. The GspA-encoding gene gspA and the upstream and downstream regions were cloned with the aid of the PCR technique. By primer extension experiments, one sigma B-dependent promoter immediately upstream of the coding region was identified. A putative factor-independent terminator closely followed the coding region. By Northern (RNA) blot analysis, a 0.95-kb transcript was detected which indicates a monocistronic transcriptional unit. The gspA mRNA was strongly induced by different stimuli like heat or salt stress and starvation for glucose. Analysis of RNA isolated from a sigma B deletion mutant revealed that the transcription of gspA is sigma B dependent. Insertional inactivation of the B. subtilis chromosomal gspA gene confirmed that the gspA gene is not essential for either vegetative growth or growth under the influence of different stresses. In gspA mutant cells, the level of flagellin was increased severalfold over that in wild-type cells.    The outermost protective structure found in endospores of Bacillus subtilis is a thick protein shell known as the coat, which makes a key contribution to the resistance properties of the mature spore and also plays a role in its interaction with compounds able to trigger germination. The coat is organized as a lamellar inner layer and an electron-dense outer layer and has a complex polypeptide composition. Here we report the cloning and characterization of an operon, cotJ, located at about 62 degrees on the B. subtilis genetic map, whose inactivation results in the production of spores with an altered pattern of coat polypeptides. The cotJ operon was identified by screening a random library of lacZ transcriptional fusions for a conditional (inducer-dependent) Lac+ phenotype in cells of a strain in which the structural gene (spoIIGB) for the early-acting, mother-cell-specific transcriptional factor sigma E was placed under the control of the IPTG (isopropyl-beta-D-thiogalactopyranoside)-inducible Pspac promoter. Sequence analysis of cloned DNA from the cotJ region complemented by genetic experiments revealed a tricistronic operon preceded by a strong sigma E-like promoter. Expression of an SP beta-borne cotJ-lacZ fusion commences at around h 2 of sporulation, as does expression of other sigma E-dependent genes, and shows an absolute requirement for sigma E. Studies with double-reporter strains bearing a cotJ-gusA fusion and lacZ fusions to other cot genes confirmed that expression of cotJ is initiated during sporulation prior to activation of genes known to encode coat structural proteins (with the sole exception of cotE). An in vitro-constructed insertion-deletion mutation in cotJ resulted in the formation of spores with no detectable morphological or resistance deficiency. However, examination of the profile of electrophoretically separated spore coat proteins from the null mutant revealed a pattern that was essentially identical to that of a wild-type strain in the range of 12 to 65 kDa, except for polypeptides of 17 and 24 kDa, the putative products of the second (cotJB) and third (cotJC) cistrons of the operon, that were missing or reduced in amount in the coat of the mutant. Polypeptides of the same apparent sizes are detected in spores of a cotE null mutant, on which basis we infer that the products of the cotJ operon are required for the normal formation of the inner layers of the coat or are themselves structural components of the coat.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)    We fused obg, encoding an essential GTP-binding protein in Bacillus subtilis, to the LacI-repressible, IPTG (isopropyl-beta-D-thiogalactopyranoside)-inducible promoter Pspac. Depletion of Obg, following removal of IPTG, caused a defect in sporulation and in expression of sporulation genes that are activated by Spo0A approximately P. These defects were significantly relieved by a mutation in spo0A (rvtA11) that bypasses the normal phosphorylation pathway, indicating that Obg might normally be required, either directly or indirectly, to stimulate activity of the phosphorelay that activates Spo0A.    To understand the potential roles of the important DNA repair protein RecA in Helicobacter pylori pathogenesis, we cloned the recA gene from H. pylori 84-183. Degenerate PCR primers based on conserved RecA protein regions were used to amplify a portion of H. pylori recA, which was used as a probe to isolate the full-length recA gene from H. pylori genomic libraries. The H. pylori recA gene encoded a protein of 347 amino acids with a molecular mass of 37.6 kDa. As expected, H. pylori RecA was highly similar to other RecA proteins and most closely resembled that of Campylobacter jejuni (75% identity). Immediately downstream of recA was an open reading frame whose predicted product showed 58% identity to the Bacillus subtilis enolase protein. recA and eno were disrupted in H. pylori 84-183 by insertion of antibiotic resistance genes. Reverse transcription-PCR demonstrated that recA and eno were cotranscribed and that insertion of the kanamycin resistance gene into recA had polar effects on expression of the downstream eno. The H. pylori recA mutants were severely impaired in their ability to survive treatment with UV light and methyl methanesulfonate and with the antimicrobial agents ciprofloxacin and metronidazole. The eno mutant had sensitivities to UV light and metronidazole intermediate to those of wild-type and recA strains, suggesting that truncation of the recA-eno transcript resulted in lowered recA expression. For survival at low pH, a recA mutant was approximately 10-fold more sensitive than strain 84-183, while the eno mutant demonstrated intermediate susceptibility. This difference occurred in the presence or absence of urea, implying the involvement of a gene in the recA region in an acid resistance mechanism distinct from that mediated by urease.    Chimaeric PCaMV35Scry genes direct in tobacco mesophyll protoplasts mRNA levels of less than one transcript per cell. We provide evidence that this low cytoplasmic cry IA(b) mRNA level is not due to a rapid turnover but rather results from a marginal import flow of cry messenger into the cytoplasm. Run-on assays indicate that the frequency of transcription initiation is not limiting. However, the cry precursor mRNA carries at least three regions that are recognized as introns. The absence of high cytoplasmic levels of spliced cry mRNAs suggests that these mRNAs are unstable and/or not efficiently made. Point mutations in the 5&apos; splice site of the most distal intron allows high accumulation levels of the full-length mRNA. This implies that the inefficient formation of full-size mRNA is a major cause of the low expression level of chimaeric cry IA(b) genes in tobacco.    A beta-lactamase (Bla)-encoding gene (bla) from Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) was cloned and the nucleotide (nt) sequence was determined. Both the nt sequence and deduced amino acid sequences reveal that the Bt Bla is very similar to that of B. cereus and other group A Bla. The transcription start point was also determined. Comparison of the upstream region of Bt bla with that of other genes suggested the presence of three sequence elements that might be involved in promoter function: the -10 (TCGGTGAT) and -35 (TTAT) sequences, an A+T-rich region (5&apos;TACTAGCTATAATTTTTTAGT) and an inverted repeat sequence (5&apos;-GAGATAGAGGC[GCTACTATCTC).    A filter binding assay was used to determine the structural features of L-tryptophan required for activation of TRAP, the trp RNA-binding attenuation protein of Bacillus subtilis. We examined the ability of L-tryptophan and 26 of its analogs to activate TRAP. Our findings show that TRAP activation by L-tryptophan is highly cooperative. We also observed that TRAP activation is stereospecific; D-tryptophan did not activate. Our results further indicate that the alpha-amino group and the carbonyl moiety of the alpha-carboxyl group of the ligand are required for TRAP activation and that the heterocyclic amino nitrogen of L-tryptophan greatly enhances TRAP activation. We also found that changes at several positions of the indole ring of L-tryptophan resulted in reduced TRAP activation. In addition, indole and 5-methylindole were shown to be effective competitors of L-tryptophan activation of TRAP.    The promoter of alcohol dehydrogenase I of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae was studied using Bacillus amyloliquefaciens alpha-amylase as a marker protein. On glucose, activity of the original ADH1 promoter decreases during late exponential, ethanol production growth phase. When 1100 bp (from -414 bp to -1500 bp) of the upstream sequence are deleted, activity increases into the late ethanol consumption phase but the promoter becomes active only after ethanol production growth phase (Ruohonen et al. (1991) Yeast 7, 337-346). We have now restored 300 bp (from -414 bp to -700 bp) upstream of the deletion site and obtained expression from the ADH1 promoter throughout the yeast growth cycle. The restored sequence allowed alpha-amylase expression to start during early exponential growth phase indicating that it is required for activation of the ADH1 promoter during ethanol production growth phase, possibly through glucose induction. On ethanol, all the promoters were active, but the short promoter was temporally activated first, suggesting that the restored sequence is not required for promoter activity during early oxidative growth.    The CryIVD protein is involved in the overall toxicity of the Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis parasporal inclusions and is one of the four major components of the crystals. Determination of the DNA sequence indicated that the cryIVD gene is the second gene of an operon which includes three genes. The first one encodes a 19-kDa polypeptide and has sequence homology with the orf1 gene of the Bacillus thuringiensis cryIIA and cryIIC operons. The second and third genes have already been identified and encode the CryIVD crystal protein and the P20 polypeptide, respectively. The promoter region was located by deletion analysis, and the 5&apos; end of the mRNA was determined by primer extension mapping. Transcription of the cryIVD gene in B. thuringiensis subsp. israelensis strains is induced 9 h after the beginning of sporulation. Sequence analysis indicated two potential promoters, a strong one and a weak one, recognized respectively by the RNA polymerase associated with the sigma 35 or the sigma 28 factor of B. thuringiensis (sigma E and sigma K of Bacillus subtilis, respectively). Transcriptional lacZ fusion integrated in single copy into the chromosome of various B. subtilis sporulation mutants confirmed the sigma E dependence of cryIVD gene transcription.    A genomic library of Campylobacter jejuni (NCTC 11351) was used to identify genes which could confer a hemolytic phenotype to Escherichia coli. Accordingly, when transformants were screened on blood plates, hemolytic colonies appeared at a frequency of 3 x 10(-4). The gene conferring the hemolytic activity was identified by subcloning and was found to be responsible for the phenotype of all hemolytic transformants isolated. The open reading frame conferring this activity encodes a protein of 36,244 Da with a typical endopeptidase type II leader sequence. The protein is modified with palmitic acid when it is processed in E. coli, confirming that it is a typical lipoprotein. The deduced gene product of 329 amino acids has significant homology to the group of solute binding proteins from periplasmic-binding-protein-dependent transport systems for ferric siderophores, including the FatB protein from Vibrio anguillarium and the FhuD protein from Bacillus subtilis. In particular, the protein contained the signature sequence for siderophore-binding proteins, suggesting that the protein may be the siderophore-binding protein component of an iron acquisition system of C. jejuni.    Translational lacZ fusions to the promoters of the parasporal, crystal protein (binary toxin) and 100-kDa ADP-ribosylating mosquitocidal toxin genes of Bacillus sphaericus were prepared and expression of the toxin genes monitored as beta-galactosidase activity. Transcription of the crystal protein gene fusion began immediately before the end of exponential growth and continued into stationary phase in both B. sphaericus and Bacillus subtilis but accompanied exponential-phase growth in Escherichia coli. Expression of this fusion was severely delayed in a B. subtilis spo0A mutant and decreased relative to the wild type in a B. subtilis spoIIAC background. beta-Galactosidase activity from the 100-kDa toxin gene fusion was restricted to early exponential phase in B. sphaericus, but in B.subtilis it continued into late exponential phase. Expression was about eightfold lower in B. sphaericus than B. subtilis suggesting an element of negative control in the native host.    Despite the isolation of an anti-sigma factor over 20 years ago, it is only recently that the concept of an anti-sigma factor emerged as a general mechanism of transcriptional regulation in prokaryotic systems. Anti-sigma factors bind to sigma factors and inhibit their transcriptional activity. Studies on the mechanism of action of anti-sigma factors has shed new light on the regulation of gene expression in bacteria, as the anti-sigma factors add another layer to transcriptional control via negative regulation. Their cellular roles are as diverse as FIgM of Salmonella typhimurium, which can be exported to sense the structural state of the flagellar organelle, to SpoIIAB of Bacillus subtilis participating in the switch from one cell type to another during the process of sporulation. Additionally, the bacteriophage T4 uses an anti-sigma factor to sabotage the Escherichia coli E.sigma 70 RNA polymerase in order to direct exclusive transcription of its own genes. Cross-linking, co-immunoprecipitations, and co-purification indicate that the anti-sigma factors directly interact with their corresponding sigma factor to negatively regulate transcription. In B. subtilis, anti anti-sigma factors regulate anti-sigma factors by preventing an anti-sigma factor from interacting with its cognate sigma factors, thereby allowing transcription to occur.    The thrS gene in Bacillus subtilis is specifically induced by starvation for threonine and is, in addition, autorepressed by the overproduction of its own gene product, the threonyl-tRNA synthetase. Both methods of regulation employ an antitermination mechanism at a factor-independent transcription terminator that occurs just upstream of the start codon. The effector of the induction mechanism is thought to be the uncharged tRNA(Thr), which has been proposed to base pair in two places with the leader mRNA to induce antitermination. Here we show that the autoregulation by synthetase overproduction is likely to utilize a mechanism similar to that characterized for induction by amino acid starvation, that is by altering the levels of tRNA charging in the cell. We also demonstrate that the base pairing interaction at the two proposed contact points between the tRNA and the leader are necessary but not always sufficient for either form of regulation. Finally, we present evidence that the thrS gene is expressed in direct proportion to the growth rate. This method of regulation is also at the level of antitermination but is independent of the interaction of the tRNA with the leader region.    The crystal structure of the trp RNA-binding attenuation protein of Bacclius subtilis solved at 1.8 A resolution reveals a novel structural arrangement in which the eleven subunits are stabilized through eleven intersubunit beta-sheets to form a beta-wheel with a large central hole. The nature of the binding of L-tryptophan in clefts between adjacent beta-sheets in the beta-wheel suggests that this binding induces conformational changes in the flexible residues 25-33 and 49-52. It is argued that upon binding, the messenger RNA target forms a matching circle in which eleven U/GAG repeats are bound to the surface of the protein ondecamer modified by the binding of L-tryptophan.    A 3 kb genomic fragment containing the nusG gene of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) was identified, cloned and sequenced. Sequence analysis revealed 3 complete and 2 truncated open reading frames (ORFs): truncated ORFU (similar to a Bacillus gene encoding a thermostable aspartate aminotransferase)-secE (94 amino acids; 79.0% similarity to Escherichia coli SecE)-nusG (300 amino acids; 73.3% similarity to E. coli NusG)-rplK (144 amino acids; 88.5% similarity to E. coli ribosomal subunit L11)-truncated rplA (similar to E. coli ribosomal subunit L1). The gene organization secE-nusG-rplKA exactly matches that in E. coli. Transcriptional analyses by the primer extension method revealed one transcriptional start site each for secE and nusG, and two sites for rplK. The presence of promoters was also confirmed with the aid of a promoter-probe vector.    The Escherichia coli aidB gene is part of the adaptive response to DNA methylation damage. Genes belonging to the adaptive response are positively regulated by the ada gene; the Ada protein acts as a transcriptional activator when methylated in one of its cysteine residues at position 69. Through DNaseI protection assays, we show that methylated Ada (meAda) is able to bind a DNA sequence between 40 and 60 base pairs upstream of the aidB transcriptional startpoint. Binding of meAda is necessary to activate transcription of the adaptive response genes; accordingly, in vitro transcription of aidB is dependent on the presence of meAda. Unmethylated Ada protein shows no protection against DNaseI digestion in the aidB promoter region nor does it promote aidB in vitro transcription. The aidB Ada-binding site shows only weak homology to the proposed consensus sequences for Ada-binding sites in E. coli (AAANNAA and AAAGCGCA) but shares a higher degree of similarity with the Ada-binding regions from other bacterial species, such as Salmonella typhimurium and Bacillus subtilis. Based on the comparison of five different Ada-dependent promoter regions, we suggest that a possible recognition sequence for meAda might be AATnnnnnnG-CAA. Higher concentrations of Ada are required for the binding of aidB than for the ada promoter, suggesting lower affinity of the protein for the aidB Ada-binding site. Common features in the Ada-binding regions of ada and aidB are a high A/T content, the presence of an inverted repeat structure, and their position relative to the transcriptional start site. We propose that these elements, in addition to the proposed recognition sequence, are important for binding of the Ada protein.    Development in Bacillus subtilis involves the formation of two cell types with activation of the transcription factors sigma F in the forespore and sigma E in the mother cell. Activation of sigma E is due to the processing of the inactive precursor pro-sigma E, which requires the putative protease SpoIIGA and the presence of active sigma F. We have introduced missense mutations altering the promoter recognition properties of sigma F. These mutations abolish pro-sigma E processing, suggesting that sigma F is involved through its transcriptional activity and that the processing machinery responds to a signal generated by the product(s) of some unidentified gene(s) transcribed in the forespore. The role of the septum in transducing this signal was investigated. Induction of sigma F during exponential growth in cells producing SpoIIGA and pro-sigma E led to a high level of processing and sigma E activity. Moreover, pro-sigma E was efficiently processed in a mutant strain blocked prior to septation and synthesizing sigma F in active form at the onset of sporulation. Therefore, the sporulation septum is not required for induction of pro-sigma E processing and pro-sigma E can be processed in the same cell in which sigma F is active. These results suggest that some unknown mechanism must exist to prevent sigma E from becoming active in the forespore.    SpoIIID is a sequence-specific, DNA-binding protein that activates or represses transcription of different genes by sigma K RNA polymerase in vitro. A Bacillus subtilis strain engineered to produce both sigma K and SpoIIID during growth showed effects of SpoIIID on expression of sigma K-dependent genes that were consistent with the effects of a small amount of SpoIIID on transcription of these genes in vitro, indicating that the strain provides a simple, in vivo method to screen for effects of SpoIIID on transcription of sigma K-dependent genes.    In Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondria, sc-mtTFB is a 341-amino-acid transcription factor required for initiation of transcription from mitochondrial DNA promoters. Specific transcription in vitro requires only sc-mtTFB and the bacteriophage-related core sc-mtRNA polymerase. Mutational analysis of sc-mtTFB has defined two regions of the protein that are important for normal function both in vivo and in vitro. These regions overlap portions of the protein that exhibit similarity to conserved region 2 of bacterial sigma factors. One mutation in this region of sc-mtTFB (tyrosine 108 to arginine [Y108R]) has a defective phenotype that matches that observed for mutations in the corresponding residue of Bacillus subtilis sigma A and sigma E proteins. However, mutations in the sigma 2.4-like region, including a 5-amino-acid deletion corresponding to crucial promoter-contacting amino acids of sigma factors, did not eliminate the ability of sc-mtTFB to initiate transcription specifically in vitro. This suggests a mechanism of promoter recognition for sc-mtRNA polymerase different from that used by bacterial RNA polymerases. Two mutations in a basic region of sc-mtTFB resulted in defective proteins that were virtually dependent on supercoiled DNA templates in vitro. These mutations may have disrupted a DNA-unwinding function of sc-mtTFB that is only manifested in vitro and is partially rescued by DNA supercoiling.    The catabolic genes pheA and pheB, coding for the conversion of phenol to catechol and catechol to 2-hydroxymuconic semialdehyde, respectively, have been cloned from Bacillus stearothermophilus BR219 into Escherichia coli. Following its localization on the 11-kb B. stearothermophilus DNA insert by deletion and expression analysis, the phenol hydroxylase gene pheA was subcloned as a 2-kb HindIII fragment, whose transformant expressed the enzyme after phenol induction and even more strongly after o-, m-, and p-cresol induction. In vitro transcription-translation experiments indicated that the phenol hydroxylase and catechol 2,3-dioxygenase enzymes are constituted of single subunits with molecular weights of 44,000 and 33,000, respectively. Nucleotide sequencing of the pheA gene revealed a strong similarity to flavin hydroxylases from Rhodococcus and Streptomyces species. Hybridization experiments indicated that the fragment containing PheA and PheB is located on a 66-kb plasmid in the parental thermophile.    We report the nucleotide sequence and the characterization of the Bacillus subtilis tagGH operon. The latter is controlled by a sigma A-dependent promoter and situated in the 308 degrees chromosomal region which contains genes involved in teichoic acid biosynthesis. TagG is a hydrophobic 32.2 kDa protein which resembles integral membrane proteins belonging to polymer-export systems of Gram-negative bacteria. Gene tagH encodes a 59.9 kDa protein whose N-moiety contains the ATP-binding motif and shares extensive homology with a number of ATP-binding proteins, particularly with those associated with the transport of capsular polysaccharides and O-antigens. That the tagGH operon is essential for cell growth was established by the failure to inactivate tagG and the 5&apos;-moiety of tagH by insertional mutagenesis. During limited tagGH expression, cells exhibited a cocoid morphology while their walls contained reduced amounts of phosphate as well as galactosamine. These observations, revealing impaired metabolism of both wall teichoic acids of B. subtilis 168, i.e. poly(glycerol phosphate), and poly(glucose galactosamine phosphate), combined with sequence homologies, suggest that TagG and TagH are involved in the translocation through the cytoplasmic membrane of the latter teichoic acids or their precursors.    Expression of genes early during sporulation in Bacillus subtilis requires the activity of the transcription factor encoded by spo0A. The active, phosphorylated form of Spo0A is produced through the action of a multicomponent pathway, the phosphorelay. A mutant defective in the first three enzymes of the Krebs citric acid cycle was unable to express early sporulation genes, apparently because of a failure to activate the phosphorelay. Cells that produce an altered Spo0A protein that can be phosphorylated by an alternative pathway were not dependent on Krebs cycle function for early sporulation gene expression. These findings suggest that Krebs cycle enzymes transmit a signal to activate the phosphorelay and that B. subtilis monitors its metabolic potential before committing itself to spore formation.    Flagellin is one of the most abundant proteins in motile bacteria, yet its expression requires a low abundance sigma factor (sigma 28). We show that transcription from the Bacillus subtilis flagellin promoter is stimulated 20-fold by an upstream A+T-rich region [upstream promoter (UP) element] both in vivo and in vitro. This UP element is contacted by sigma 28 holoenzyme bound at the flagellin promoter and binds the isolated alpha 2 subassembly of RNA polymerase. The UP element increases the affinity of RNA polymerase for the flagellin promoter and stimulates transcription when initiation is limited by the rate of RNA polymerase binding. Comparison with other promoters in the flagellar regulon reveals a bipartite architecture: the -35 and -10 elements confer specificity for sigma 28, while promoter strength is determined largely by upstream DNA sequences.    The AbrB protein of Bacillus subtilis is a transcriptional regulator of numerous genes in diverse metabolic pathways that commence expression at the onset of stationary phase. AbrB is a DNA-binding protein with specific affinity for defined DNA regions of its target genes. Analysis of these regions has failed to detect a readily apparent sequence determinant for AbrB binding and it is believed that AbrB recognizes a specific DNA structure formed by a finite subset of base sequences. We have examined six AbrB binding regions for intrinsic bending and found that three do not contain a detectable intrinsic bend, whereas three do. AbrB binding to these regions resulted in electrophoretic mobility patterns that were consistent with, but did not prove, that the DNA moieties were present in a bent configuration.    DNA dependent RNA polymerase from exponentially growing Staphylococcus aureus cells was purified. An SDS-polyacrylamide gel analysis of the most purified preparation revealed that it consists of beta, beta&apos;, alpha, and sigma with apparent molecular masses of 151, 147, 42, and 55 kDa, respectively. The sigma subunit cross reacted with a polyclonal antibody against Bacillus subtilis sigma 43. The cross reacting peptide co-migrated with the B. subtilis sigma 43 subunit. The implications of these results are discussed. Promoter specific in vitro run-off transcripts were obtained using the purified enzyme preparation. Specific conditions for the polymerization reaction are defined.    To investigate the mechanism of transcriptional regulation of cryIVA and cryIVB, encoding 130-kDa dipteran-active crystal proteins, in Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis, we introduced each gene into several sporulation mutants of Bacillus subtilis. A spoIIG mutation, the wild-type gene of which encodes sigma E precursor, completely blocked the cryIVB transcription. In contrast, low but detectable transcription of cryIVA was observed in the spoIIG mutant. In the wild-type B. subtilis, no transcription of cryIVB was detected before T2 (2 h after the onset of stationary phase), while the cryIVA transcription started at the late exponential phase at low levels. Furthermore, in a wild-type strain of B. thuringiensis subsp. israelensis, transcription of cryIVA began earlier than that of genes encoding other crystal components, cryIVB and cytA. A consensus sequence recognized by an RNA polymerase containing sigma H of B. subtilis was found upstream of the transcription start point of cryIVA, which overlapped with that recognized by sigma E.    Sporulation of Bacillus subtilis requires the coordinated expression of two separate developmental programs in the mother cell and forespore compartments by sigma E and sigma F, respectively. This coordination is maintained through the action of cross-regulatory factors that control the activities of the various sporulation-specific sigma factors. We present here the isolation and characterization of one such cross-regulatory factor, the spoIIR gene. Using a genetic screen, we have isolated four mutant alleles of spoIIR. These mutants were isolated as expressing sigma F-directed genes but not sigma E-directed genes. The block in sigma E-directed gene expression in spoIIR mutants was caused by an inability to process pro-sigma E to its active form. Cloning and characterization of the spoIIR gene determined that its transcription is directed by sigma F. Thus, SpoIIR is required for linking the activation of sigma E to the activation of sigma F and coordinating the initiation of the two developmental programs required to form a spore.    In a previous publication (He, J.-S., and Fulco, A. J. (1991) J. Biol. Chem. 266, 7864-7869), we reported that a 15-17-base pair DNA sequence (designated a Barbie box element) in the 5&apos;-regulatory regions of cytochrome P450BM-1 and P450BM-3 genes from Bacillus megaterium was recognized by a barbiturate-regulated protein. It is now recognized that essentially all eukaryotic and prokaryotic genes whose 5&apos;-flanking regions are known and that encode barbiturate-inducible proteins contain the Barbie box element. A 4-base pair sequence (AAAG) is found in the same relative position in all Barbie box elements. In B. megaterium, mutation of the Barbie box located in the P450BM-1 gene leads to the constitutive synthesis of cytochrome P450BM-1 and a 10-fold increase of expression of Bm1P1, a small gene located upstream of the P450BM-1 gene, that encodes a putative regulatory protein. Mutation of the P450BM-3 Barbie box significantly increased the expression of both P450BM-3 and Bm3P1 (another small gene located upstream of the P450BM-3 gene that encodes a second putative regulatory protein) in response to pentobarbital induction but left the basal levels unaffected. In gel mobility shift assays, Bm3R1, a repressor of the P450BM-3 gene, was found to specifically interact with the Barbie box sequences of the B. megaterium P450 genes. Mutated Barbie boxes showed a decreased binding affinity for Bm3R1 compared to their wild type (unmutated) counterparts. Barbie box sequences were also shown to specifically interact with putative positive regulatory factors of B. megaterium cells. These putative positive factors were induced by pentobarbital and were also present at high levels during late stationary phase of B. megaterium cell cultures grown in the absence of barbiturates. The mutated Barbie box sequences had greater binding affinity for these positive factors than did unmutated Barbie box sequences. DNase I footprinting analysis of the 5&apos;-flanking region of the P450BM-1 gene revealed that these positive factors protected a segment of DNA covering a portion of the Barbie box sequence and a small flanking region. Similar footprinting experiments with the 5&apos;-flanking region of the P450BM-3 gene failed, however, to unambiguously reveal protected sequences in the Barbie box region. The evidence suggests that the positive factors and Bm3R1 compete with each other for binding to the Barbie box region, especially in the 5&apos;-flanking region of the P450BM-1 gene, and for putative roles in the regulation of transcription from the B. megaterium P450 genes.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)    A mutation in Bacillus subtilis spo0A codon 97 suppressed the sporulation defect caused by the spo0A9V mutation. The suppressor activity of the codon 97 mutation was evident only in the presence of a novel spo0H allele. Our results suggest that the spo0A gene product interacts with the sigma factor subunit of RNA polymerase.    The Bacillus subtilis sacY and sacT genes encode antiterminator proteins, similar to the Escherichia coli bglG gene product and required for transcription of sucrose metabolism genes. A Tn10 insertion into bglP (formerly sytA) has been previously identified as restoring sucrose utilization to a strain with deletions of both sacY and sacT. The nucleotide sequence of bglP showed a high degree of homology with the E. coli bglF gene (BglF is a beta-glucoside permease of the phosphotransferase system and also acts as a negative regulator of the BglG antiterminator). Complementation studies of an E. coli strain with a deletion of the bgl operon showed that BglP was a functional beta-glucoside permease. In B. subtilis, bglP complemented in trans both the bglP::Tn10 original insertion and a phenotypically similar bglP deletion. Disruption of licT abolished the suppressor phenotype in a bglP mutant. LicT is a recently identified third B. subtilis antiterminator of the BglG/SacY family. These observations indicated that BglP was also a negative regulator of LicT. Both LicT and BglP seem to be involved in the induction by beta-glucosides of an operon containing at least two genes, bglP itself and bglH, encoding a phospho-beta-glucosidase. Other beta-glucoside genes homologous to bglP and bglH have been recently described in B. subtilis. Thus, B. subtilis possesses several sets of beta-glucoside genes, like E. coli, but these genes do not appear to be cryptic.    Expression of the Bacillus subtilis pyr operon is regulated by exogenous pyrimidines and the protein product of the first gene of the operon, PyrR. It has been proposed that PyrR mediates transcriptional attenuation at three untranslated segments of the operon (R.J. Turner, Y. Lu, and R.L. Switzer, J. Bacteriol., 176:3708-3722, 1994). In this study, transcriptional fusions of the pyr promoter followed by the pyr attenuation sequences, either individually or in tandem to a lacZ reporter gene, were used to examine the physiological functions of all three attenuators through their ability to affect beta-galactosidase expression. These fusions were studied as chromosomal integrants in various B. subtilis strains to examine the entire range of control by pyrimidines, PyrR dependence, amd developmental control of pyr gene expression. The nutritional regulation of each attenuator separately was roughly equivalent to that of the other two and was totally dependent upon PyrR, and that of tandem attenuators was cumulative. The regulation of a fusion of the spac promoter followed by the pyrP:pyrB intercistronic region to lacZ produced results similar to those obtained with the corresponding fusion containing the pyr promoter, demonstrating that attenuator-dependent regulation is independent of the promoter. Extreme pyrimidine starvation gave rise to two- to threefold-higher levels of expression of a pyr-lacZ fusion that lacked attenuators, independent of PyrR, than were obtained with cells that were not starved. Increased expression of a similar spac-lacZ fusion during pyrimidine starvation was also observed, however, indicating that attenuator-independent regulation is not a specific property of the pyr operon. Conversion of the initiator AUG codon in a small open reading frame in the pyrP:pyrB intercistronic region to UAG reduced expression by about half but did not alter regulation by pyrimidines, which excludes the possibility of a coupled transcription-translation attenuation mechanism. Developmental regulation of pyr expression during early stationary phase was found to be dependent upon the attenuators and PyrR, and the participation of SpoOA was excluded.    A recombinant strain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae was constructed that contained the genes encoding a bacterial alpha-amylase (AMY1), a yeast glucoamylase (STA2) and a bacterial pullulanase (pulA). The Bacillus amyloliquefaciens alpha-amylase and S. cerevisiae var. diastaticus glucoamylase genes were expressed in S. cerevisiae using their native promoters and the encoded enzymes secreted under direction of their native leader sequences. In contrast, the Klebsiella pneumoniae pullulanase gene was placed under the control of the yeast alcohol dehydrogenase gene promoter (ADC1P) and secreted using the yeast mating pheromone alpha-factor secretion signal (MF alpha 1S). Transcription termination of the pullulanase gene was effected by the yeast tryptophan synthase gene terminator (TRP5T), whereas termination of the glucoamylase and alpha-amylase genes was directed by their native terminators. Pullulanase (PUL1) produced by recombinant yeasts containing ADC1P MF alpha 1S pulA TRP5T (designated PUL1) was further characterized and compared to its bacterial counterpart (PulA). The different genes were introduced into S. cerevisiae in different combinations and the various amylolytic Saccharomyces transformants compared to Schwanniomyces occidentalis. Introduction of PUL1 into a S. cerevisiae strain containing both STA2 and AMY1, resulted in 99% assimilation of starch.    Five transcription units of the Pseudomonas solanacearum hrp gene cluster are required for the secretion of the HR-inducing PopA1 protein. The nucleotide sequences of two of these, units 1 and 3, have been reported. Here, we present the nucleotide sequence of the three other transcription units, units 2, 4 and 7, which are together predicted to code for 15 hrp genes. This brings the total number of Hrp proteins encoded by these five transcription units to 20, including HrpB, the positive regulatory protein, and HpaP, which is apparently not required for plant interactions. Among the 18 other proteins, eight belong to protein families regrouping proteins involved in type III secretion pathways in animal and plant bacterial pathogens and in flagellum biogenesis, while two are related solely to proteins involved in secretion systems. For the various proteins found to be related to P. solanacearum Hrp proteins, those in plant-pathogenic bacteria include proteins encoded by hrp genes. For Hrp-related proteins of animal pathogens, those encoded by the spa and mxi genes of Shigella flexneri and of Salmonella typhimurium and by the ysc genes of Yersinia are involved in type III secretion pathways. Proteins involved in flagellum biogenesis, which are related to Hrp proteins of P. solancearum, include proteins encoded by fli and flh genes of S. typhimurium, Bacillus subtilis and Escherichia coli and by mop genes of Erwinia carotovora. P. solanacearum Hrp proteins were also found to be related to proteins of Rhizobium fredii involved in nodulation specificity.    Based on the cytoplasmically localized killer plasmids pGKL1 and pGKL2 of Kluyveromyces lactis two new linear hybrid plasmids were constructed which consist of pGKL1, into which in addition to the previously developed cytoplasmically expressible LEU2* selectable marker a glucose dehydrogenase-encoding bacterial gene (gdh A) has been integrated. One of the hybrid plasmids carries the bacterial gene preceded by an arbitrarily placed cytoplasmic promoter (upstream conserved sequence) in front of the coding region (pRKL121). The other plasmid was constructed in such a way that the ATG start codon of the gdh A gene was fused in frame to the ATG start codon of the killer plasmid&apos;s open reading frame 5 (pRKL122). The structures of both linear hybrid plasmids were confirmed by restriction analysis, Southern hybridization, and sequencing of the junction sites. Yeast strains carrying either of the plasmids expressed the glucose dehydrogenase gene; however, expression of the in phase fused gene was 40-fold higher compared to the arbitrarily placed cytoplasmic promoter. In general, an in phase fusion was not required for expression, but efficiency is dramatically enhanced when the 5&apos; noncoding sequences in front of the heterologous genes are the same as those found on the native killer plasmids. The developed system can serve as a reporter for determining the efficiency of the different cytoplasmic promoters present on both linear plasmids. Hybrid plasmids were stably maintained without selective pressure in K. lactis and they were transferred and expressed also in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.    The SpoIIID protein of Bacillus subtilis (Bs) is a small DNA-binding protein that is essential for gene expression of the mother cell compartment during sporulation. We have cloned a DNA fragment from Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) that showed a specific hybridization with the Bs spoIIID gene. Sequence analysis found an open reading frame encoding 90 amino acids (aa), which are 89% identical to the deduced aa sequence of Bs spoIIID. Upstream from the transcription start point (tsp), a nucleotide sequence highly homologous to the consensus sequence motif for the sigma 35-recognized promoters was found. Northern blot analysis has indicated that the expression of the gene is induced only at the midsporulation stage, and that the gene constitutes an operon with a downstream gene, mreB. The Bs strain carrying the spoIIID delta erm or spoIIID83 mutation completely restored sporulation ability upon introduction of the spoIIID homologous gene from Bt. These results strongly suggest that the gene we have cloned is a Bt homolog of spoIIID.    A defective prophage vector, phi 105MU331, for high-level protein overproduction in Bacillus subtilis, was derived by random insertion of a lacZ reporter gene. The site of insertion not only provided efficient inducible transcription of heterologous genes, but also prevented lysis of the host cell. The region of the insertion in phi 105MU331 lies close to the right cohesive end of phi 105. DNA sequence analysis revealed that this region of phi 105 somewhat resembles the lysis cassette of various phages, including lambda. The site of insertion lies in a possible &apos;holin&apos; gene, which could explain the block in host cell lysis. Dual promoters apparently responsible for the strong inducible transcription lie in an untranslated region just upstream from the putative holin gene. This region is probably equivalent to the site of the major late promoter and antiterminator of the lambdoid phages. The sequence features could, thus, account for the useful properties of the phi 105MU331 vector system.    Transcription of the genome of Bacillus subtilis phage phi 29 is tightly controlled, taking place in two stages, early and late. We have analyzed the abundance of the transcripts produced from each viral promoter throughout the infection cycle. We compare the relative strength of each promoter, as well as get a better understanding of the regulatory events, finding a new promoter regulated by the viral protein p4. The two strong early promoters, A2b and A2c, responsible for the expression of genes 6 to 1, are coordinately repressed by the viral protein p4, although repression is not complete: both promoters are still active at late times of infection. Since repression by protein p4 was very efficient in vitro, and affects its own synthesis, it is likely that this protein is produced in limiting amounts, not being bound to all viral DNA molecules present in the cell at a given time. Protein p4, also known to activate the late promoter responsible for the expression of all the structural and morphogenetic genes, is the key regulator of phage phi 29 development.    Transcription in the mother cell at early stages of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis is controlled by sigma E, a sigma factor that is synthesized in the predivisional cell as an inactive larger precursor, pro-sigma E. Activation of sigma E depends on sigma F, the factor that governs transcription in the forespore. Genetic experiments have indicated that transduction of the activation signal from the forespore to the mother cell requires the products of some genes belonging to the sigma F-controlled regulon. We have identified and characterized a sigma F-dependent gene, csfX, encoding a protein necessary and sufficient for triggering processing of pro-sigma E. The CsfX protein contains a typical amino-terminal signal sequence suggesting that, although synthesized in the forespore, it may act across the septum to activate the membrane-bound enzyme that is responsible for pro-sigma E processing in the mother cell.    The expression of the larvicidal Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis cryIVB gene in cyanobacteria has been suggested to be an effective means of controlling mosquito populations. Using a variety of cryIVB constructs, in this study we have examined the effect of Synechococcus PCC 7942 culture age on intracellular toxin levels and have attempted to determine the mechanisms by which cryIVB gene expression is regulated. The data suggest that specific degradation of the cryIVB mRNA limits toxin production; however, the addition of cyanobacterial 3&apos; untranslated DNA sequences to the cryIVB gene did not improve mRNA stability or toxin levels. An analysis of the cryIVB sequence and comparison of codon usage patterns with highly expressed cyanobacterial genes suggest that inefficient translation and intragenic ribosomal binding sites impede protein synthesis and result in rapid turnover of the toxin mRNA.    Activation (phosphorylation) of the transcription factor encoded by spo0A is essential for the initiation of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. At least three histidine protein kinases are involved in the phosphorylation of Spo0A. Under some growth conditions, KinA was the primary kinase, but under other conditions, KinB had the more critical role. KinC was required for the initial activation of Spo0A, even in the presence of KinA and KinB.    The mtrB gene from Bacillus pumilus encodes a 76-amino-acid polypeptide with 77% identity to the trp RNA-binding attenuation protein (TRAP) from Bacillus subtilis. B. pumilus TRAP binds trp leader RNA from either B. subtilis or B. pumilus in a tryptophan-dependent manner. Altering threonine 52 to alanine eliminated RNA-binding activity of B. pumilus TRAP.    We have identified an additional sporulation gene, named spoIIP, in the region of the Bacillus subtilis chromosome located immediately downstream of the gpr gene (227 degrees on the genetic map). A null mutation of spoIIP arrests sporulation at an early stage of engulfment (stage IIii), a phenotype similar to that already described for spoIID and spoIIM mutants. This gene encodes a 401-residue polypeptide, which is predicted to be anchored in the membrane, most of the protein being localized outside the cytoplasm. The spoIIP gene is transcribed from a promoter located in the interval between the gpr and the spoIIP reading frames. This promoter has the structural and genetic characteristics of a sigma E-dependent promoter. Transcription of spoIIP is abolished by a mutation in spoIIGB, the gene encoding sigma E, and can be induced during exponential growth in cells engineered to produce an active form of sigma E. Plasmid integration-excision experiments leading to the formation of genetic mosaics during sporulation indicate that as with SpoIID and SpoIIM, SpoIIP is required only in the mother cell. Disruption of spoIIP had little or no effect on the expression of sigma F- and sigma E-controlled regulons but inhibited transcription from sigma G-dependent promoters and abolished transcription from promoters under the control of sigma K. We propose that, together with SpoIID and SpoIIM, the SpoIIP protein is involved in the dissolution of the peptidoglycan located in the sporulation septum.    The divergently transcribed nasA gene and nasB operon are required for nitrate and nitrite assimilation in Bacillus subtilis. The beta-galactosidase activity of transcriptional lacZ fusions from the nasA and nasB promoters was high when cells were grown in minimal glucose medium containing poor nitrogen sources such as nitrate, proline, or glutamate. The expression was very low when ammonium or glutamine was used as the sole nitrogen source. The repression of the genes during growth on good sources of nitrogen required wild-type glutamine synthetase (GlnA), but not GlnR, the repressor of the glnRA operon. Primer extension analysis showed that the -10 region of each promoter resembles those of sigma A-recognized promoters. Between the divergently oriented nasA and nasB promoters is a region of dyad symmetry. Mutational analysis led to the conclusion that this sequence is required in cis for the activation of both nasA and nasB. The derepression of these genes in a glnA mutant also required this sequence. These results suggest that an unidentified transcriptional activator and glutamine synthetase function in the regulation of nasA and the nasB operon.    comK is a positive autoregulatory gene occupying a central position in the competence-signal-transduction network. All regulatory routes identified in this network converge at the level of comK expression. The ComK protein is required for the transcriptional induction of comK and the late competence genes, which specify morphogenetic and structural proteins necessary for construction of the DNA-binding and uptake apparatus. In this report we demonstrate that ComK specifically binds to DNA fragments containing promoter and upstream sequences of the genes it affects (comC, comE, comF, comG and comK). Using portions of the region upstream of comC we show that the ComK-binding sequences are essential for the expression of competence. Moreover, we demonstrate that the presence of ComK stimulates the expression of comF-lacZ and comG-lacZ translational fusions in vivo in Escherichia coli. These results indicate that the gene product of comK is identical to the previously inferred competence transcription factor (CTF).    Within the framework of an international project for the sequencing of the entire Bacillus subtilis genome, a 29 kb chromosome segment, which contains the hut operon (335 degrees) and the wapA gene, has been cloned and sequenced. This region (28,954 bp) contains 21 complete ORFs and one partial one. The 5th, 6th and 17th genes correspond to hutH encoding histidase, hutP encoding the positive regulator for the hut operon and wapA encoding a precursor of three major wall-associated proteins, respectively. A homology search for their products deduced from the 21 complete ORFs revealed that nine of them exhibit significant homology to known proteins such as urocanase (Pseudomonas putida), a protein involved in clavulanic acid biosynthesis (Streptomyces griseus), amino acid permeases (lysine, Escherichia coli; histidine, Saccharomyces cerevisiae; and others), beta-glucoside-specific phosphotransferases (E. coli and Erwinia chrysanthemi) and 6-phospho-beta-glucosidases (E. coli and Erw. chrysanthemi). Based on the features of the determined sequence and the results of the homology search, as well as on genetic data and sequence of the hut genes reported by other groups, it is predicted that the B. subtilis hut operon may consist of the following six genes (6th-1st), the last of which is followed by a typical rho-independent transcription terminator: hutP, hutH, EE57A (hutU) encoding urocanase, EE57B (hutI) encoding imidazolone-5-propionate hydrolase, EE57C (hutG) encoding formiminoglutamate hydrolase and EE57D (tentatively designated as hutM) possibly encoding histidine permease. Interestingly, the direction of transcription of these hut genes is opposite to that of the movement of the replication fork.    As part of the Bacillus subtilis genome sequencing project, we have determined the complete nucleotide sequence of a skin element which is located between spoIVCB and spoIIIC. The entire sequence of this element is 48,032 bp in length, and contains 57 ORFs with putative ribosome-binding sites. Two of them correspond to previously sequenced and characterized genes, cwIA and spoIVCA. Furthermore, seven ORF products identified in this element show interesting similarities with known proteins present in data banks, including the phi 105 immunity repressor, the phi 105 Cro-like protein and the SPP1 terminase. These results indicate the possibility that the skin element is a cryptic remnant of an ancestral temperate phage.    A gene was found in Bacillus subtilis which encodes a protein highly homologous to the Escherichia coli rpsA gene product, the S1 ribosomal protein. The B. subtilis protein contains the domain responsible for binding to ribosomes and two S1 motifs, instead of four as found in the E. coli protein. The B. subtilis protein is similar in this way to the equivalent protein of plant chloroplast ribosomes, supposed to be the counterpart of E. coli S1. The gene is expressed during vegetative growth in B. subtilis at the transcriptional and translational levels, as judged by Northern hybridization and expression in a translational fusion with a reporter gene. In contrast to the E. coli situation, it can be inactivated without dramatic effects on cell viability. Southern hybridization of the B. subtilis DNA fragment encoding this gene revealed specific homologous fragments in all other Gram-positive bacteria tested. The hybridization pattern with B. stearothermophilus suggests the presence of at least two homologous genes in this bacterium. We show that in B. subtilis the ORF preceding the rpsA homologue encodes a protein which is highly similar to the product of the E. coli mssA gene which is located upstream of rpsA. Again, in contrast to the E. coli situation, where these genes are co-transcribed, in B. subtilis they are separated by a transcription terminator and the mssA homologue is transcribed during sporulation. We suggest that during the evolution very similar structures and genetic organization of these two genes were conserved but acquired different functions in Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria.    The Lactococcus lactis gene encoding trimethoprim resistance has been cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis. Several lines of evidence indicate that the cloned gene encodes dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR). (i) It fully complements the fol &quot;null&quot; mutation in E. coli. (ii) Nucleotide sequencing of the cloned fragment revealed the presence of one open reading frame encoding a protein that shares homology with the family of bacterial DHFR enzymes. (iii) Overexpression of this open reading frame in E. coli resulted in the appearance in cell extracts of a protein of the expected size as well as in a dramatic increase of DHFR activity. In cell extracts, the DHFR activity was not inhibited by low trimethoprim concentration. By Northern (RNA) blotting and primer extension analyses, the size and the start point of the dhfr transcript, respectively, have been determined. Results of these experiments indicate that in L. lactis the dhfr gene represents part of a larger transcription unit.    Bacillus subtilis contains at least three classes of heat-shock genes regulated by different mechanisms. We are studying class I heat-shock genes encoded by the operons dnaK and groE. These two operons are both expressed from a vegetative promoter, and their regulation involves a novel heat-shock element designated CIRCE. Here we show that induction of both operons results from enhanced synthesis of mRNA and is independent of de novo protein synthesis. To answer the question of whether dnaK is involved in the deregulation of the heat-shock response as reported for Escherichia coli, two different insertion mutations were isolated within the tetracistronic dnaK operon (orf39-grpE-dnaK-dnaJ). In one mutant a cat cassette was inserted at the beginning of orf39. Transcriptional analysis revealed that this mutation abolished expression of the whole operon. In contrast, the basal level of groE mRNA was significantly increased at 37 degrees C, followed by a prolonged delay in the shut off after temperature upshift. These data point to a crucial role for the orf39 gene in the regulation of class I heat-shock genes. In the other mutant an internal 0.8 kb Bg/II fragment of dnaK was replaced by the cat cassette. In contrast to E. coli dnaK null mutants, the two B. subtilis dnaK operon mutants could grow within a temperature range from 16-52 degrees C. At temperatures above 52 degrees C, they failed to form colonies on agar plates, started to filament, and lost motility. Furthermore, the induction profile of the groE and dnaK operons was not impaired in the dnaK::cat mutant.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    The cloning and sequence of the 5&apos; untranslated region (5&apos;-UTR) of the Bacillus licheniformis (Bl) 6816 subtilisin Carlsberg gene (subC) are reported here. The 5&apos; and 3&apos; ends of subC transcripts were characterized, and the promoter identified. Expression was studied using a fused lacZ reporter gene integrated into the chromosome of heterologous host Bacillus subtilis (Bs). beta Gal activities of mutants deleted within the promoter region identified a region which is required for stimulation by the transcriptional activator proteins, DegU and DegQ. This region is close to the transcription start point (tsp), and is adjacent to a sequence homologous to that involved in DegU/Q stimulation of the Bs subtilisin gene, aprE. Expression of subC in Bs was optimized by the use of heterologous promoter and by the deletion of UTR sequences predicted to be involved in secondary structures in the native subC mRNA. Sequence comparison with other subtilisin Carlsberg-type-encoding genes revealed a high degree of conservation of the entire 5&apos;-UTR, including regulatory sequences and promoter, as well as part of the structural gene.    Production of the plasmid-pXO2-encoded capsule by Bacillus anthracis is required for full virulence of the organism. The induction of capsule synthesis in vitro requires growth in the presence of bicarbonate and CO2; however, little else is known about the regulation of capsule synthesis and the role it plays in the expression of virulence. Recently, transposon Tn917 mutagenesis of B. anthracis plasmid pXO2 identified genes involved in capsule production and genes associated with virulence in inbred mice. One mutant, UUP5, had an 8.2-kb deletion located outside of the capsule structural gene region (cap). UUP5 was reduced significantly in capsule production and in virulence as compared to the wild-type (wt) parental strain. Using a HindIII-generated pXO2 library, we examined fragments contained in the deleted region and showed that electroporation of the mutant with a cloned 2.3-kb HindIII fragment restored capsule production to wt levels. Sequence analysis of the 2.3-kb fragment revealed a 1449-bp open reading frame (ORF) encoding a 483-amino-acid (57 kDa) protein, in good agreement with the 55-kDa protein detected by in vitro transcription/translation. Construction of a frameshift mutant that replaced the 55-kDa protein with a truncated 34-kDa moiety abrogated the complementing activity of the fragment in UUP5. mRNAs specific for cap and for the 1449-bp ORF were detected in mutant UUP5 transformed with the unaltered fragment and grown in the presence of bicarbonate, but not in air. No cap-specific mRNA, and very low levels of ORF-specific mRNA, were detected in UUP5 containing the frameshift mutation.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    Interconnected regulatory networks control the initiation of sporulation and the development of genetic competence in Bacillus subtilis. These two developmental pathways have both common and distinct elements and employ similar regulatory strategies. Activation of the ComK transcription factor serves to integrate many of the physiological signals that control competence development, including cell density signals. The cell density signals for competence are mediated by two different peptide pheromones, the ComX pheromone, a 9 or 10 amino acid peptide with a modified tryptophan residue, and the competence stimulating factor, CSF, which is at least in part a peptide. Activation of the Spo0A transcription factor by phosphorylation serves as a developmental checkpoint and to integrate several physiological signals that control entry into the sporulation pathway. The physiological signals are generated by conditions of nutrient deprivation, high cell density, the Krebs cycle, DNA replication, DNA damage, and some aspect of the chromosome partitioning machinery. Both the ComK and Spo0A transcription factors are part of autogenous regulatory loops that control entry into competence or sporulation.    The trp RNA-binding attenuation protein (TRAP) regulates expression of the B. subtilis trp operon by binding to an RNA target composed of 11 G/UAG repeats in the trp leader transcript. TRAP contains 11 identical subunits arranged in a ring. The binding of 11 molecules of L-tryptophan to sites formed between adjacent subunits activates TRAP to bind trp leader RNA. We propose that the trp leader RNA forms a matching circle on the surface of TRAP when it binds. RNA binding is relatively insensitive to changes in ionic strength and pH, and is apparently driven by changes in entropy. Two lysine residues on the surface of TRAP have been shown to be important for RNA binding.    The gene encoding dihydroorotase (DHOase) of Lactobacillus leichmannii, the third enzyme of the pyrimidine biosynthetic pathway (Genbank (EMBL) accession no X78999), was cloned by phenotypic complementation of an E coli pyrC deficient mutant after transformation with Lactobacillus leichmannii genomic library DNA. The open reading frame of the L leichmannii pyrC gene spans 1281 bp and codes for a 427 amino cid polypeptide with a calculated M(r) of 46,316 Da. Primer extension showed that the initiation site for transcription is 37 bp upstream of the putative start codon ATG and Northern blot analysis confirmed its independent transcription from the adjacent pyrB gene. Comparison of the deduced amino acid sequence of L leichmannii DHOase with sequences established for other organisms yielded 46.6% identity with the corresponding Bacillus subtilis enzyme. Highly conserved protein domains suggest importance for the enzyme&apos;s function.    sur0B20 is a mutation that suppresses the effects of spo0B delta B or spo0F221 mutations in Bacillus subtilis, sur0B20 is an allele of the spo0A gene (Glu-14 to Val-14 conversion) and restores the sporulation of spo0B or spo0F mutants to the wild-type level. Here, we report the isolation of suppressor mutations of sur0B20 (ssb). One of these mutations, ssb-12, severely impairs the suppressor activity of sur0B20. A 2.5-kbp MboI fragment which complements the ssb-12 mutation was cloned by the prophage transformation method using phi CM as a vector. Nucleotide sequencing of the fragment revealed two open reading frames (orf1 and orf2). Gene disruption and complementation experiments showed that orf2 is the ssb gene. ssb was shown to encode a protein with a molecular weight of 48,846 (428 amino acid residues) showing strong similarity to transmitter kinases, especially KinA, of two-component regulatory systems. Therefore, ssb was renamed kinC. Deletion of kinC had no observable effect on sporulation. kinC transcription was induced at the onset of sporulation, probably from a sigma A-dependent promoter, and its expression was shut off at T3. DNase I protection experiments showed that the Spo0A protein binds to two adjoining sites in the kinC promoter region with different affinities. These results suggest that kinC expression might be regulated by Spo0A.    Phosphorylation of the transcription factor encoded by spo0A is required for the initiation of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. Production and accumulation of Spo0A-P is controlled by histidine protein kinases and the spo0 gene products. To identify additional genes that might be involved in the initiation of sporulation and production of Spo0A-P, we isolated genes which when present on a multicopy plasmid could suppress the sporulation defect of a spo0K mutant. kinC was one gene isolated in this way. A multicopy plasmid containing kinC completely or partially suppressed the sporulation defect caused by mutations in spo0K, kinA, spo0F, and spo0B, indicating that at least when overexpressed, KinC is capable of stimulating phosphorylation of Spo0A independently of the normal phosphorylation pathway. The predicted product of kinC is 428 amino acids long and is most similar to KinA and KinB, the histidine protein kinases involved in the initiation of sporulation. In otherwise wild-type strains, kinC null mutations caused little or no defect in sporulation under the conditions tested. However, in the absence of a functional phosphorelay (spo0F or spo0B), KinC appears to be the kinase responsible for phosphorylation of the sof-1 and rvtA11 forms of Spo0A.    sigma B of the gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis is an alternative transcription factor activated by a variety of environmental stresses, including the stress imposed upon entry into the stationary growth phase. Previous reports have shown that this stationary-phase activation is enhanced when cells are grown in rich medium containing glucose and glutamine. The sigma B structural gene, sigB, lies in an operon with three other genes whose products have been shown to control sigma B activity in response to environmental stress. However, none of these is sufficient to explain the enhanced stationary-phase activation of sigma B in response to glucose. We show here that the four genes previously identified in the sigB operon constitute the downstream half of an eight-gene operon. The complete sigB operon is preceded by a sigma A-like promoter (PA) and has the order PA-orfR-orfS-orfT-orfU-PB-rsbV-rsbW-sig B-rsbX, where rsb stands for regulator of sigma-B and the previously identified sigma B-dependent promoter (PB) is an internal promoter preceding the downstream four-gene cluster. Although the genes downstream of PB were also transcribed by polymerase activity originating at PA, this transcription into the downstream cluster was not essential for normal induction of a sigma B-dependent ctc-lacZ fusion. However, deletion of all four upstream open reading frames was found to interfere with induction of the ctc-lacZ fusion in response to glucose. Additional deletion analysis and complementation studies showed that orfU was required for full glucose induction of sigma B-dependent genes. orfU encodes a trans-acting, positive factor with significant sequence identity to the RsbX negative regulator of sigma B. On the basis of these results, we rename orfU as rsbU to symbolize the regulatory role of its product.    sigma B is a secondary sigma factor of Bacillus subtilis. sigma B-dependent transcription is induced when B. subtilis enters the stationary phase of growth or is exposed to any of a number of different environmental stresses. Three genes (rsbV, rsbW, and rsbX), which are cotranscribed with the sigma B structural gene (sigB), encode regulators of sigma B-dependent gene expression. RsbW and RsbV have been shown to control sigma B activity, functioning as an inhibitory sigma B binding protein and its antagonist, respectively. Using the SPAC promoter (PSPAC) to control the expression of the sigB operon, a ctc::lacZ reporter system to monitor sigma B activity, and monoclonal antibodies to determine the levels of sigB operon products, we have now obtained evidence that RsbX is an indirect regulator of sigma B activity. Genetic data and in vivo measurements argue that RsbX negatively regulates an extension of the RsbV-RsbW pathway that requires the product of an additional regulatory gene (rsbU) which lies immediately upstream of the sigB operon. The results are consistent with RsbU, or a process dependent on RsbU, being able to facilitate the RsbV-dependent release of sigma B from RsbW but normally prevented from doing this by RsbX.    The flagellin genes from six Borrelia species were cloned, sequenced and characterized at the molecular level. The flagellin genes of two relapsing fever Borrelia species, B. hermsii and B. crocidurae, three Lyme disease genomic species, B. burgdorferi, B. afzelii and B. garinii, and the avian borreliosis agent, B. anserina, were compared and showed an 85-93% sequence identity to each other. Comparison of the fla genes from the different Lyme borreliosis spirochaetes revealed that they were 94-99% identical. Nucleotide sequencing of the fla gene and primer extension on isolated mRNA from both B. hermsii (as transcribed in Escherichia coli) and B. burgdorferi (as transcribed in the natural host) identified the putative transcriptional start points, the ribosomebinding sites and the promoter regions of these genes. The deduced promoter of the Borrelia flagellin gene resembled neither the sigma 70 promoter of prokaryotes, as seen for the genes for the outer-surface proteins A and B in Lyme disease Borrelia and the genes for the variable major proteins 7 and 21 of B. hermsii, nor the sigma 28 consensus promoter region of motility genes from other bacteria. Instead, the promoter of the fla gene in Borrelia has most similarity to the bacteriophage SP01 sigma gp33-34 promoter sequence of Bacillus subtilis.    We describe the identification and characterization of a gene, herein designated cotG, encoding an abundant coat protein from the spores of Bacillus subtilis. The cotG open reading frame is 195 codons in length and is capable of encoding a polypeptide of 24 kDa that contains nine tandem copies of the 13-amino-acid long, approximately repeated sequence H/Y-K-K-S-Y-R/C-S/T-H/Y-K-K-S-R-S. cotG is located at 300 degrees on the genetic map close to another coat protein gene, cotB. The cotG and cotB genes are in divergent orientation and are separated by 1.3 kb. Like the promoter for cotB, the cotG promoter is induced at a late stage of sporulation under the control of the RNA polymerase sigma factor sigma K and the DNA-binding protein GerE. The -10 and -35 nucleotide sequences of the cotG promoter resemble those of other promoters recognized by sigma K-containing RNA polymerase, and centered 70 bp upstream of the apparent start site is a sequence that matches the consensus binding site for GerE. Spore coat proteins from a newly constructed cotG null mutant lack not only CotG but also CotB, a finding that suggests that CotG may be a morphogenetic protein that is required for the incorporation of CotB into the coat.    A search for Mycobacterium smegmatis genes showing similarity to the conserved family encoding major sigma factors in diverse prokaryotes has identified two such determinants. Both genes are expressed in exponentially growing cells, as judged by Western immunoassays. A series of chromatographic steps was used to purify M. smegmatis RNA polymerase holoenzyme and it was shown that its ability to initiate in vitro transcription with a heterologous Bacillus subtilis promoter is dependent on the presence of these sigma factor(s). Reconstitution of specific in vitro transcription activity was obtained upon mixing of M. smegmatis core RNA polymerase with the major sigma factor of Bacillus subtilis. We also demonstrated in vitro transcription of the M. smegmatis rrnB promoter by the M. smegmatis RNA polymerase. Significantly, highly active B. subtilis RNA polymerase holoenzyme was unable to transcribe this gene.    Despite the lack of involvement of the competence-specific, membrane-associated deoxyribonuclease (DNase) in competence development, the expression of the gene encoding this protein, nucA, was shown to be dependent on the competence signal transduction pathway, and in particular on ComK, the competence transcription factor, which was shown to bind to the DNA region upstream of nucA. The expression of nucB, specifying an extracellular DNase, which was cloned on the basis of its homology to nucA, was shown to be sporulation-specific and dependent on the gene products of spo0A and spoIIG, the latter constituting an operon responsible for the synthesis of the mother-cell-specific sigma factor sigma E. The observed differential expression of nucA and nucB demarcates the appearance of DNase activities which are either associated with the cytoplasmic membrane or secreted into the medium during different post-exponential growth-phase processes.    Transcription of the ATP-dependent deoxynuclease operon (addAB), as monitored by means of an addAB-lacZ transcriptional fusion, has a low, constitutive level and is initiated from a sigma A type promoter. Transcription of addAB is independent of DNA-damaging agents known to induce the SOS response in Bacillus subtilis. However, addAB transcription increased significantly during competence development. This competence-specific induction was dependent on the gene products of srfA, degU and comK, but not on that of recA. Deletion analysis of the addAB promoter region demonstrated that the competence-specific transcription induction requires DNA sequences located upstream of the addAB promoter that associated with ComK, the competence transcription factor. The latter finding indicates that a direct regulatory link exists between the establishment of the competent state and the synthesis of AddAB, required for recombination of internalized donor DNA.    Phosphofructokinase (PFK) plays a major role in glycolysis. Deficiency of PFK-M is characterized by muscle weakness due to fuel crisis in exercising muscles. To elucidate the gene defect of PFK-deficient patients, we have cloned and determined the complete structure and transcription mechanism of human PFK-M mRNA and gene. Molecular defects were investigated in three unrelated Japanese family cases. The first case was characterized by a point mutation at the donor site of intron 15 of the PFK-M gene. Cryptic splicing resulted in a 25 amino acid truncation in the patient&apos;s PFK-M. The second case possessed a point mutation at the donor site of intron 19, resulting in the skipping of exon 19 and the truncation of 55 amino acids. In the third case, a missense mutation was identified in the coding region. The review of an updated mutation repertoire indicates the heterogeneity of the molecular mechanism of the disease.    We identified, cloned and sequenced an operon comprising of two genes gtcR and gtcS located adjacent to the grs operon of Bacillus brevis, which encodes the multienzymes involved in the biosynthesis of the peptide antibiotic gramicidin S. The transcription initiation site of the gtcRS operon was determined in Bacillus brevis and Bacillus subtilis. The encoded proteins GtcR and GtcS were identified as members of the two-component system family of signal transducing proteins.    Flagella production in Campylobacter jejuni 81116 is subject to phase variation; the bacterium is able to switch its flagellum synthesis, and thereby its motility, on and off. Under standard laboratory growth conditions flagellar phase variants can be maintained as stable, pure cultures. We found conditions that efficiently induced a phase shift in vitro. The flaA gene but not the flaB gene is subject to the on and off switch. Minor amounts of FlaB are still present in aflagellate cells. We previously showed that flagellin gene expression in phase variants was regulated at the transcriptional level. Here, sequence data prove that abolishment of flaA transcription is not caused by DNA rearrangements or mutations within the flagellin locus. Since flaA is preceded by a typical sigma 28 promoter a C. jejuni sigma 28 homolog could play a role in regulation of flaA gene expression but such a gene or protein could not be detected. However, in vitro transcription could be detected using sigma 28-holoenzyme preparations from Bacillus subtilis. Possible regulatory mechanisms that may control flagellar phase variation in Campylobacter are discussed.    The initiation of sporulation in B. subtilis is regulated by the Spo0A transcription factor, which is activated by phosphorylation to control developmental switching from the vegetative to the sporulation state. The level of phosphorylation of Spo0A is regulated by the phosphorelay, a signal transduction system based on the protein-histidine kinase-response regulator two-component paradigm. To initiate sporulation, the cell must recognize and interpret a large variety of environmental, metabolic, and cell cycle signals that influence the phosphorylation level of Spo0A. We describe here a family of protein-aspartate phosphatases with activity on Spo0F approximately P, a response regulator component of the phosphorelay, that provide a mechanism for signal recognition and interpretation. These phosphatases function to drain the phosphorelay, lower Spo0A approximately P levels, and prevent sporulation. The integration of diverse environmental signals that affect the initiation of sporulation likely occurs through the competition between opposing activities of protein kinases and protein phosphatases.    The gene encoding penicillin-binding protein 4 (PBP 4) of Bacillus subtilis, pbpD, was cloned by two independent methods. PBP 4 was purified, and the amino acid sequence of a cyanogen bromide digestion product was used to design an oligonucleotide probe for identification of the gene. An oligonucleotide probe designed to hybridize to genes encoding class A high-molecular-weight PBPs also identified this gene. DNA sequence analysis of the cloned DNA revealed that (i) the amino acid sequence of PBP 4 was similar to those of other class A high-molecular-weight PBPs and (ii) pbpD appeared to be cotranscribed with a downstream gene (termed orf2) of unknown function. The orf2 gene is followed by an apparent non-protein-coding region which exhibits nucleotide sequence similarity with at least two other regions of the chromosome and which has a high potential for secondary structure formation. Mutations in pbpD resulted in the disappearance of PBP 4 but had no obvious effect on growth, cell division, sporulation, spore heat resistance, or spore germination. Expression of a transcriptional fusion of pbpD to lacZ increased throughout growth, decreased during sporulation, and was induced approximately 45 min into spore germination. A single transcription start site was detected just upstream of pbpD. The pbpD locus was mapped to the 275 to 280 degrees region of the chromosomal genetic map.    Clostridium perfringens is a source of food poisoning in humans and animals because of production of a potent enterotoxin (CPE). To study the regulation of the cpe gene in C. perfringens, we cloned and sequenced the cpe promoter regions and N-terminal domains from three strains. The cpe promoter region from one strain contained a 45-bp insertion compared with previously published sequences. This insertion was also found in two (of five) other Cpe+ strains. cpe gene expression in C. perfringens was measured by using translational fusions of each promoter type to the Escherichia coli gusA gene, which codes for beta-glucuronidase. For either promoter type, cpe-gusA expression was undetectable throughout exponential growth but increased dramatically at the beginning of the stationary phase. To measure cpe expression in Bacillus subtilis, cpe-gusA fusions were integrated into the B. subtilis chromosome. Both types of promoter exhibited moderate expression during exponential growth; cpe expression increased threefold at the beginning of the stationary phase. Transcriptional start sites were determined by primer extension and in vitro transcription assays. For C. perfringens, both types of promoter gave the same 5&apos; end, 197 bp upstream of the translation start (50 bp downstream of the 45-bp insertion). In B. subtilis, however, the 5&apos; end was internal to the 45-bp insertion, suggesting the use of a different promoter than that utilized by C. perfringens.    Fragments of chromosomal DNA from Lactobacillus paracasei subsp. paracasei CG11 (formerly Lactobacillus casei CG11) capable of functioning as promoters were isolated using the broad host range, promoter-probe vector pGKV210. Five such fragments designated P61, P79, P80, P116, and P144 were completely sequenced and analyzed. Fragment P61 had the highest transcriptional efficiency in Escherichia coli and Lactobacillus reuteri whereas P80 was the most active in Lactococcus lactis. In general, the orders of the transcriptional strengths were almost identical in E. coli and Lactobacillus reuteri but different from that in Lactococcus lactis. Mapping of the 5&apos; end of cat mRNA showed that different regions of fragments P79 and P144 were used as promoters in Lactococcus lactis than in E. coli and Lactobacillus reuteri. Analysis of these DNA sequences revealed that the putative -35 and -10 hexanucleotides resembled those of E. coli, Bacillus subtilis, and lactococci. The spacing between these two hexanucleotides and between the putative -10 hexanucleotide and the transcriptional start point (A residues predominated) ranged from 17 to 18 base pairs and from 5 to 7 base pairs, respectively. Each of the cloned Lactobacillus paracasei CG11 promoter-like fragments contained an AT-rich sequence upstream of the putative -35 region (from 60 to 73%).    The dipeptide permease (Dpp) of Escherichia coli transports peptides consisting of two or three L-amino acids. The periplasmic dipeptide-binding protein (DBP), encoded by the dppA gene, also serves as a chemoreceptor. We sequenced the dpp locus, which comprises an operon of five genes, dppABCDE. Its organization is the same as the oligopeptide permease (opp) operon of Salmonella typhimurium and the spo0K operon of Bacillus subtilis. The dpp genes are also closely related to the hbpA gene, which encodes a haem-binding lipoprotein, and four other genes in an unlinked operon of unknown function in Haemophilus influenzae. Each Dpp protein has an Opp, Spo0K and H. influenzae homologue. Transcription of the dpp operon initiates 165 bases upstream of the predicted dppA start codon. The start site for transcription is preceded by potential -35 and -10 regions of a sigma 70 promoter. During exponential growth in Luria-Bertani (LB) broth, the level of dpp mRNA increases in two steps, one between A590 0.2 and 0.4 and one between A590 0.7 and 1.0. The 310 nucleotides between dppA and dppB include a RIP (repetitive IHF-binding palindromic) element, whose deletion from a multi-copy plasmid causes fivefold and 10-fold reductions in the levels of upstream and downstream dpp mRNA, respectively.    Sporulation-specific sigma factor E (sigma E) of Bacillus subtilis is both necessary and sufficient for transcription of the dacB gene, which encodes penicillin-binding protein 5*. Evidence in support of this conclusion was obtained by primer extension analysis of dacB transcripts and the induction of active sigma E with subsequent synthesis of PBP 5* in vegetative cells.    The trp RNA-binding attenuation protein (TRAP) of Bacillus subtilis has been crystallized and examined by crystallography using X-ray synchrotron radiation diffraction data. Crystals of TRAP complexed with L-tryptophan belong to space group C2 with a = 156.8 A, b = 114.05 A, c = 105.9 A, beta = 118.2 degrees. Crystals of a potential heavy-atom derivative of TRAP complexed with 5-bromo-L-tryptophan grow in the same space group with similar cell dimensions. X-ray data for the native crystals and for the derivative have been collected to 2.9 A and 2.2 A resolution, respectively. Peaks in the self-rotation function and in the Patterson synthesis could only be explained by two 11-subunit oligomers (each formed by an 11-fold axis of symmetry) in the asymmetric unit lying with the 11-fold rotation axes parallel to each other. The consequence is that the TRAP molecule has 11-fold symmetry and contains 11 subunits.    Multidrug transporters are membrane proteins which, by an unknown mechanism, recognize diverse toxic compounds and efflux them from cells. We found that two substrates of the Bacillus subtilis multidrug transporter Bmr, rhodamine 6G and tetraphenylphosphonium (TPP), enhance Bmr expression at the level of transcription. Gene knock-out experiments demonstrated that an open reading frame located immediately downstream of the bmr gene is required for this enhancement. The protein product of this open reading frame, BmrR, shows distinct sequence homology to several known bacterial transcription activator proteins, such as MerR and TipAL. Gel-mobility shift and DNase protection assays indicated that BmrR binds specifically, as a dimer, to the bmr gene promoter. Furthermore, the affinity of this binding was enhanced by rhodamine and TPP, thus suggesting that these structurally dissimilar molecules interact directly with BmrR. Indeed, we found that BmrR bound rhodamine 6G stoichiometrically, one rhodamine molecule/BmrR dimer, and that TPP competed with rhodamine for this binding. Our results indicate that the enhancement of Bmr expression by some of its substrates is due to the ability of the regulatory protein, BmrR, to bind structurally dissimilar compounds resulting in enhanced transcription of the transporter gene.    We cloned and sequenced an operon of nine genes coding for the subunits of the Bacillus subtilis F0F1 ATP synthase. The arrangement of these genes in the operon is identical to that of the atp operon from Escherichia coli and from three other Bacillus species. The deduced amino acid sequences of the nine subunits are very similar to their counterparts from other organisms. We constructed two B. subtilis strains from which different parts of the atp operon were deleted. These B. subtilis atp mutants were unable to grow with succinate as the sole carbon and energy source. ATP was synthesized in these strains only by substrate-level phosphorylation. The two mutants had a decreased growth yield (43 and 56% of the wild-type level) and a decreased growth rate (61 and 66% of the wild-type level), correlating with a twofold decrease of the intracellular ATP/ADP ratio. In the absence of oxidative phosphorylation, B. subtilis increased ATP synthesis through substrate-level phosphorylation, as shown by the twofold increase of by-product formation (mainly acetate). The increased turnover of glycolysis in the mutant strain presumably led to increased synthesis of NADH, which would account for the observed stimulation of the respiration rate associated with an increase in the expression of genes coding for respiratory enzymes. It therefore appears that B. subtilis and E. coli respond in similar ways to the absence of oxidative phosphorylation.    The expression of a vegetative catalase gene, katA (formerly the kat-19 gene), is necessary to protect Bacillus subtilis from H2O2, presumably by removing the oxidant from the environment. Genetic analysis of katA revealed that this gene is under two distinct forms of regulation, temporal and H2O2 inducible. The results reported here demonstrate that (i) the H2O2-inducible regulation of katA gene is not a component of the SOS regulon, (ii) the regulatory genes spo0A and abrB are involved in the temporal regulation but not the H2O2-specific induction of katA gene expression, and (iii) transcription initiation for the katA gene occurs at the same site under both forms of regulation.    Using a PCR-based approach, we have cloned various sigma factor homologous genes from Clostridium acetobutylicum DSM 792. The nucleotide sequence of the dnaE-sigA operon has been determined and predicts two genes encoding 69- and 43-kDa proteins. The deduced DnaE amino acid sequence has approximately 30% amino acid identity with protein sequences of other primases. The putative sigA gene product shows high homology to primary sigma factors of various bacteria, most significantly to Bacillus subtilis and Staphylococcus aureus. Northern (RNA) blot analysis revealed that both genes from an operon, which is clearly expressed under conditions that allow for cell division. A promoter sequence with significant homology to the sigma H-dependent Bacillus promoters preceded the determined transcriptional start point, 182 bp upstream of the GUG start codon of dnaE. The homologous genes to Bacillus spp. sporulation sigma factors G, E, and K have been cloned and sequenced. Indirect evidence for the existence of sigma F was obtained by identification of a DNA sequence homologous to the respective Bacillus consensus promoter. Southern hybridization analysis indicated the presence of sigma D and sigma H homologous genes in C. acetobutylicum. A new gene group conserved within the eubacteria, but with yet unspecified functions, is described. The data presented here provide strong evidence that at least some of the complex regulation features of sporulation in B. subtilis are conserved in C. acetobutylicum and possibly Clostridium spp.    The Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase sigma factor sigma G is a cell-type-specific regulatory protein that governs the transcription of genes that are expressed at an intermediate to late stage of sporulation in the forespore compartment of the sporangium. Here we report the identification of a mutation (lon-1) that causes inappropriate transcription of genes under the control of sigma G under nutritional and genetic conditions in which sporulation is prevented. The mutation is located at 245 degrees on the genetic map and lies within a newly identified open reading frame that is predicted to encode a homolog to Lon protease. Inappropriate transcription of sigma G-controlled genes in the lon-1 mutant is not prevented by mutations in genes that are normally required for the appearance of sigma G during sporulation but is prevented by a mutation in the structural gene (spoIIIG) for sigma G itself. In light of previous work showing that spoIIIG is subject to positive autoregulation, we propose that Lon protease is responsible (possibly by causing degradation of sigma G) for preventing sigma G-directed transcription of spoIIIG and hence the accumulation of sigma G in cells that are not undergoing sporulation. An integrated physical and genetic map is presented that encompasses 36 kb of uninterrupted DNA sequence from the lon pheA region of the chromosome, corresponding to 245 degrees to 239 degrees on the genetic map.    Genetic experiments have suggested that sigma F, the first compartment-specific transcription factor in sporulating B. subtilis, is regulated by an anti-sigma factor SpoIIAB and an anti-anti-sigma factor SpoIIAA. Previously, we reported biochemical results demonstrating that SpoIIAB is both a phosphokinase whose substrate is SpoIIAA and an inhibitor of sigma F-directed transcription. We now show that in the presence of SpoIIAB and ATP or ADP, SpoIIAA can undergo two alternative reactions. When ATP is present, SpoIIAA is phosphorylated rapidly and completely to SpoIIAA-phosphate, and SpoIIAB is immediately released; but in the presence of ADP, SpoIIAA forms a long-lasting complex with SpoIIAB. ADP is an inhibitor of the phosphorylation by ATP. Furthermore, we have mutated SpoIIAA at residue Ser 58, the target for phosphorylation, to aspartate or alanine. SpoIIAAS58D, which apparently resembles SpoIIAA-phosphate, is unable to make a complex with SpoIIAB and is devoid of anti-anti-sigma F activity, whereas SpoIIAAS58A, which cannot be phosphorylated, makes complexes with SpoIIAB in the presence of ADP or ATP and has constitutive anti-anti-sigma F activity both in vivo and in vitro. It seems likely that the alternative reactions of SpoIIAA and SpoIIAB, involving ADP or ATP, regulate the anti-anti-sigma capacity of SpoIIAA and hence the activity of sigma F.    pAM beta 1 is a low-copy-number, promiscuous plasmid from Gram-positive bacteria that replicates by a unidirectional theta-type mode. Its replication is initiated by an original mechanism, involving the positive rate-limiting RepE protein. Here we show that the pAM beta 1-encoded CopF protein is involved in negative regulation of the plasmid copy number. CopF represses approximately 10-fold the transcription initiated at the promoter of the repE gene and binds to a 31 bp segment which is located immediately upstream of the -35 box of the repE promoter. We propose that CopF inhibits initiation of transcription at the repE promoter by binding to its operator.    Spo0A is a phosphorylation-activated transcription factor of Bacillus subtilis. It is a member of the response regulator superfamily of bacterial signal transduction proteins and controls many of the changes in gene expression that occur during the transition into stationary phase and during the initiation of sporulation. To identify the domains of Spo0A most critical for determining its structural and functional features, presumptive homologues of the spo0A gene were characterized in a collection of eight Bacillus species and six Clostridium species representing phylogenetically diverse members of these genera. An alignment of the partial or complete DNA sequences of these homologues revealed three regions of especially high conservation in the effector domain. We speculate that the most highly conserved of these corresponds to the recognition helix of a putative helix-turn-helix motif, and, therefore, represents the actual DNA-containing surface of the protein. In the case of homologues identified in Bacillus anthracis and Clostridium acetobutylicum and retrieved by polymerase chain reaction amplification, we confirmed by gene-disruption analysis that the homologue actually is required for initiation of sporulation. Apparent homologues of the B. subtilis spoIVB gene were also discovered immediately upstream from the spo0A homologues in all Bacillus and Clostridium species examined. The discovery of homologues of B. subtilis sporulation genes in these diverse species implies that the gene products required for specifying pathways of sporulation-specific gene activation and for determining key morphogenetic changes may be highly conserved and suggests that an approach similar to that undertaken here might be used as a general strategy to retrieve and compare their gene sequences. Exhaustive efforts to detect a spo0A-like gene in non-endospore formers, including close relatives of Bacillus such as Listeria and Staphylococcus, were uniformly unsuccessful, suggesting that regulation of gene activity during the transition into stationary phase mediated by Spo0A-like proteins may be exclusive to the endospore-forming bacteria.    The region of the genome of Mycoplasma capricolum encompassing the genes for Enzymes I and IIAglc of the phosphoenolpyruvate:sugar phosphotransferase system (PTS) was cloned and sequenced. Examination of the sequence revealed a unique arrangement of the pts operon. In all other bacterial species characterized thus far, the gene encoding Enzyme I (ptsI) in the pts operon is located immediately downstream of the gene (ptsH) encoding HPr, a general energy coupling protein of the PTS. In M. capricolum, ptsH and ptsI reside on 2 distinct operons at separate loci on the chromosome (Zhu PP, Reizer J, Reizer A, Peterkofsky A, 1993, J Biol Chem 268:26531-26540). In the present work, it is shown that the Mycoplasma Enzyme I gene is preceded by an open reading frame homologous to the product of the Escherichia coli kdtB gene and is followed by the gene (crr) encoding Enzyme IIAglc. Northern blot analysis indicated that ptsI and crr constitute a dicistronic operon that includes an independent promoter for the crr gene. Primer extension studies established the transcription start sites for the ptsI and crr genes. The products of the ptsI and crr genes are homologous to previously sequenced Enzymes I and IIAglc proteins but are more similar to the counterpart proteins from gram-positive than to those from gram-negative organisms. The deduced amino acid sequence of the Mycoplasma Enzyme I shows that it differs from other Enzymes I by having fewer acidic amino acids and more basic, amidated, and aromatic amino acids. The deduced amino acid sequence of the Mycoplasma Enzyme IIAglc indicates that it is the shortest (154 residues) of the proteins in this class and it is the only Enzyme IIAglc with a tryptophan and a cysteine residue. In vitro sugar phosphorylation studies with extracts from E. coli and Bacillus subtilis and purified proteins indicated that the Mycoplasma HPr is not a phosphoacceptor from the E. coli Enzyme I, whereas the Mycoplasma Enzyme IIAglc accepts and transfers phosphate from both E. coli and B. subtilis PTS components.    The amount of the rate-limiting replication initiator protein RepR of plasmid pIP501 is negatively controlled by an antisense RNA (RNAIII) and a dispensable protein (CopR). Deletions or mutations in either component cause a 10-20-fold copy number increase. RNAIII induces transcription attenuation of the repR mRNA; the mode of CopR action remained unclear. To test the function of CopR, transcriptional fusions of promoters pI, pII and pIII with lacZ were integrated into the Bacillus subtilis chromosome. CopR and/or RepR were supplied in trans, and LacZ synthesis measured. The results show that CopR represses the repR promoter pII. Neither CopR nor RepR autoregulate their promoters. Gel mobility shift assays indicate that CopR binds to a 44 bp DNA fragment comprising the inverted repeat upstream of pII.    Mother-cell-specific gene expression during sporulation of Bacillus subtilis is controlled by sigma E and sigma K RNA polymerases. sigma E is required for the expression of genes during stage III (engulfment of the forespore), while sigma K is required for the expression of genes during stage IV (formation of the spore cortex) and stage V (formation of the spore coat). Previous studies indicated that SpoIIID could influence transcription by sigma K RNA polymerase in vitro. We demonstrate here that SpoIIID is a DNA-binding protein that recognizes specific sequences in the promoter regions and open reading frames of both sigma E- and sigma K-dependent genes. We also show that SpoIIID can activate or repress transcription by both forms of RNA polymerase. These results support the idea that the appearance and subsequent disappearance of SpoIIID plays a major role in controlling the mother-cell pattern fo gene expression during stages III to V of sporulation.    The expression of xylose utilization in Bacillus subtilis is regulated at the level of transcription by xylose dependent Xyl repressor-xyl operator interaction. We have structurally and functionally characterized the binding sites of Xyl repressor in the xyl regulatory region. Methylation and hydroxyl radical protection and ethylation interference of binding suggests tandem overlapping xyl operators spaced by four base-pairs. A mutational inactivation of each and both operators was performed. DNA retardation experiments with these mutants confirmed the existance of two binding sites. They can be simultaneously occupied, despite their overlapping, intertwined organization. In vivo repressor titration and regulation of indicator gene expression by the xylO mutants confirmed that both binding sites contribute to regulation of the xyl operon. The protection and interference patterns of both sites are identical and indicate binding of a repressor oligomer to one side of B-form DNA of each operator. A tandem overlapping arrangement of two operators is also found in the xyl regulatory sequences of Bacillus megaterium, Staphylococcus xylosus and Lactobacillus pentosus. The xyl operon of Bacillus licheniformis contains a similar element in which the second operator is more diverged. This high degree of conservation among bacteria of different genera supports the conclusion that a tandem overlapping arrangement of xyl operators contributes to efficient regulation.    Bacillus megaterium contains a barbiturate-inducible cytochrome P450BM-3, which catalyzes the hydroxylation of fatty acids. We report the intriguing finding that peroxisome proliferators, a major class of epigenetic carcinogen, are also extremely potent inducers of this enzyme being up to 50-fold more potent than one of the most effective barbiturates, secobarbital. Similar to barbiturates, the mechanism of induction appears to involve the direct binding of the peroxisome proliferator to the transcriptional repressor (Bm3R1), resulting in its dissociation from its DNA operator. These observations provide evidence that peroxisome proliferators can interact with a transcription factor to modulate gene expression. The data also demonstrate that the effects of these compounds are highly conserved through evolution and that there are important common denominators in the regulation of gene expression by peroxisome proliferators and the barbiturates. Evidence is presented to indicate that this may involve effects on unsaturated fatty acid homeostasis.    The C terminus of mammalian transcription factor RAP30 has been found to be a cryptic DNA-binding domain strikingly similar to the C-terminal DNA-binding domain present in conserved region 4 of members of the sigma 70 family of bacterial sigma factors. This RAP30 domain shares strongest sequence similarity with the DNA-binding domain present in region 4 of Bacillus subtilis sporulation-specific sigma K. Like the region 4 DNA-binding activity of Escherichia coli sigma 70, the RAP30 C-terminal DNA binding activity is masked in intact RAP30 but is readily detectable when the RAP30 C terminus is expressed as a fusion protein. Consistent with a role for RAP30 DNA-binding activity in transcription, mutations that abolish DNA binding also abolish transcription. Therefore, RAP30 may function at least in part through the action of an evolutionarily ancient DNA-binding domain that first appeared prior to the divergence of bacteria and eukaryotes.    Ribonuclease P, which contains a catalytic RNA subunit, cleaves 5&apos; precursor-specific sequences from pre-tRNAs. It was previously shown that the RNase P RNA optimally cleaves substrates which contain the mature, 3&apos;-terminal CCA of tRNA. In order to determine the contributions of those individual 3&apos;-terminal nucleotides to the interaction, pre-tRNAs that have CCA, only CC or C or are without CCA at the 3&apos;-end were synthesized by run-off transcription, tested as substrates for cleavage by RNase P RNA and used in photoaffinity crosslinking experiments to examine contact sites in the ribozyme. In order to generalize the results, analyses were carried out using three different bacterial RNase P RNAs, from Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis and Thermotoga maritima. At optimal (Kcat/Km) ionic strength (1 M NH4+/25 mM Mg2+), Km increases incrementally 3- to 10-fold upon stepwise removal of each nucleotide from the 3&apos;-end. At high ionic strength (2 M NH4+/50 mM Mg2+), which suppresses conformational effects, removal of the 3&apos;-terminal A had little effect on Km, indicating that it is not a specific contact. Analysis of the deletion and substitution mutants indicated that the C residues act specially; their contribution to binding energy at high ionic strength (approximately 1 kcal/mol) is consistent with a non-Watson-Crick interaction, possibly irregular triple-strand formation with some component of the RNase P RNA. In agreement with previous studies, we find that the RNase P holoenzyme in vitro does not discriminate between tRNAs containing or lacking CCA. The structural elements of the three RNase P RNAs in proximity to the 3&apos;-end of tRNA were examined by photoaffinity crosslinking. Photoagent-labeled tRNAs with 3&apos;-terminal CCA, only CC or C, or lacking all these nucleotides were covalently conjugated to the three RNase P RNAs by irradiation and the sites of crosslinks were mapped by primer extension. The main crosslink sites are located in a highly conserved loop (probably an irregular helix) that is part of the core of the RNase P RNA secondary structure. The crosslinking results orient the CCA of tRNA with respect to that region of the RNase P RNA.    A cloned DNA fragment from Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120 that complements an arginine auxotrophic mutant from the same organism was found to include an open reading frame encoding a 427-residue polypeptide that is homologous to N-acetylornithine aminotransferase from Bacillus subtilis, Escherichia coli, and Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The gene encoding N-acetylornithine aminotransferase in bacteria has been named argD. The expression of Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120 argD, as well as of argC, was analyzed at the mRNA level. Both genes were transcribed as monocistronic mRNAs, and their expression was not affected by exogenously added arginine. Primer extension analysis identified transcription start points for both genes which were preceded by sequences similar to that of the E. coli RNA polymerase sigma 70 consensus promoter. A second transcription start point for the argD gene that is not preceded by a sigma 70 consensus promoter was detected in dinitrogen-grown cultures.    Bacillus anthracis exotoxins mediate most of the symptomatology of severe anthrax. In addition to a clinical syndrome reminiscent of septic shock, which may be mediated by cytokines produced by macrophages stimulated with lethal toxin, infected patients show profound edema at sites of infection. Edema is mediated by edema toxin (ET), which comprises of a binding molecule, protective antigen, and an active moiety, edema factor, which possesses intrinsic adenylyl cyclase activity. Intracellular cyclic AMP (cAMP) regulates the production of several cytokines that modulate edema formation and play important roles in host defense against invading bacteria. To determine whether ET enhanced the accumulation of cAMP in monocytes and thereby influenced cytokine production, we cultured human monocytes with endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide [LPS]) and dilutions of ET and determined the levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) in culture supernatant fluids. We further estimated cytokine-specific mRNA accumulation in monocytes by reverse transcription PCR and examined intracellular cAMP concentrations following treatment with ET. ET and LPS each induced monocytes to secrete comparable amounts of IL-6. ET did not inhibit and in most experiments modestly enhanced LPS-induced IL-6 production. In contrast to this stimulatory effect on IL-6 production, ET induced little or no TNF-alpha production. Moreover, ET profoundly inhibited LPS-induced TNF-alpha synthesis. These regulatory phenomena were also observed at the mRNA level in association with dose-related enhancement of intracellular cAMP in ET-treated monocytes. Monocytes treated with dibutyryl cAMP, an active analog of cAMP, produced cytokines in a pattern identical to that of cells treated with ET. The disruption of cytokine networks as a consequence of unregulated, ET-induced cAMP accumulation in human monocytes may impair cellular antimicrobial responses and contribute to clinical signs and symptoms.    Asymmetric cell division during the process of sporulation in the bacterium Bacillus subtilis generates dissimilar progeny that exhibit distinct programs of gene transcription. Recent work reveals a partner switching mechanism that governs the activity of the sporulation regulatory protein sigma F and that may be responsible for the establishment of cell type specific gene transcription.    Specificity of promoter utilization in bacterial RNA polymerases is imparted by a class of proteins referred to as sigma factors. Conserved region 2.3 of these proteins is thought to play a role in the strand separation process that occurs during the formation of an initiation-competent RNA polymerase-promoter complex. We have used a heterologous system consisting of Escherichia coli core RNA polymerase and Bacillus subtilis sigma A to probe the effects of amino acid substitutions in region 2.3. In agreement with previous work [Juang &amp; Helmann (1994) J. Mol. Biol. 235, 1470-1488] we observe that several amino acid substitutions exacerbate the deleterious effect of low temperature on promoter-dependent initiation. On the other hand, no such enhanced cold sensitivity is found with double-stranded templates that contain short &quot;bubbles&quot; of single-stranded DNA, indicating that the DNA-melting defect imposed by these mutant sigma factors can be suppressed by the use of such bubble templates. These results support the involvement of region 2.3 in the strand separation process that accompanies open complex formation at promoters.    Sporulation-induced alkaline phosphatases (APases) of Bacillus subtilis require the products of the sporulation stage-0 genes and certain stage-II genes, including the spoIIA operon, for induction. Mutations in either sapA or sapB bypass this requirement [Piggot and Taylor, J. Gen. Microbiol. 10 (1977) 69-80], resulting in APase production in a spoIIA sapA or spoIIA sapB strain, under sporulation conditions. B. subtilis has multiple structural genes encoding APases, which are induced either by phosphate starvation or during sporulation, or under both conditions. We report studies designed to determine which APase(s) were being expressed in the sap mutants, and from which promoters. phoB (formerly phoAIII), one of the structural genes encoding an APase in B. subtilis, is expressed under both sporulation and phosphate starvation conditions, but from separate promoters [Chesnut et al., Mol. Microbiol. 5 (1991) 2181-2190]. The spoIIA sapA and spoIIA sapB strains express phoB under sporulation conditions. Interestingly, the expression of phoB during sporulation was from Pv, the phosphate starvation-inducible promoter of phoB, rather than from Ps, the sporulation-specific promoter. Since the induction of phosphate starvation-inducible promoters during phosphate limitation requires the phoPR operon [Miki et al., Genetics 52 (1965) 1093-1100], we asked if the phoPR products were involved in regulating Pv expression under sporulation conditions. The phoPR genes are transcribed under sporulation conditions, regulated by sapA and sapB under sporulation conditions, and required for expression from Pv under sporulation conditions.    The lacZ gene encoding a beta-galactosidase (beta Gal) from the hyperthermophile Thermotoga maritima was cloned on an 11-kb fragment by complementation of an Escherichia coli lacZ deletion stain. The nucleotide sequence of the structural gene and two other ORFs found within a 6317-bp region were determined. The deduced amino acid (aa) sequence of the Tt. maritima beta Gal predicts a 1037-aa polypeptide with a calculated M(r) of 122,312. The translated sequence is 30% similar to nine other beta Gal sequences from bacteria and one yeast. Alignment of the Tt. maritima beta Gal with these other sequences reveals that the residues responsible for Mg2+ binding, catalysis and substrate recognition are conserved in the thermophilic enzyme. Sequence analysis also revealed the presence of a divergently transcribed operon containing at least two other genes 5&apos; to lacZ. These ORFs encode proteins homologous to a second family of beta Gal found in Bacillus species and to an ATP-dependent family of bacterial oligopeptide transport proteins.    The transcriptional start points of ten Lactobacillus delbruckii ssp. lactis DSM7290 genes were determined by primer extension. The upstream located promoter regions, including potential -35 and -10 regions and the spacing between them were compared to the well-known Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis promoters. The Lb. delbruckii -35 consensus sequence (TTGACA) seems to be less conserved then the E. coli sequence. The nucleotides TGC were often found upstream of the -10 region (TATAAT). The most frequently observed spacing between the two core promoter regions was 17 nt and the main distance between the -10 region and the transcriptional start point was mostly determined to be 6 nt in contrast to 7 nt, as described for E. coli promoters. The preferred initiation nucleotides in Lb. delbruckii were shown to be definitely purines (A or G). The ribosome binding sites located downstream of the promoters revealed the consensus sequence 3&apos;-UCCUCCU-5&apos;, being the predicted 3&apos;-OH end of the Lactobacillus 16S rRNA with a high degree of homology to known 16S rRNAs.    As an approach to an analysis of the biosynthesis of the aminoglycoside antibiotic butirosin (But), we investigated the chromosomal regions flanking the ButR gene (aphA4/butA) of Bacillus circulans NRRL-B3312, and have identified, by nucleotide sequence analysis, a large open reading frame (ORF; ButB) upstream from the ButR gene. Hybridization was detected between butB and chromosomal DNA from other Bacillaceae that produce But-like compounds (but not from non-producers). Interruption of this sequence by insertion of an erythromycin-resistance-encoding gene (erm) at either of two distinct sites eliminated the production (biosynthesis or export) of But, thus indicating a role for butB in antibiotic production. Gene butB is transcribed in the same direction as butA and encodes a protein of 1616 amino acid (aa) residues with a 30-aa N-terminal signal peptide. Comparison of the sequence for the translation product (ButB) with the aa compositions and sequences of known bacterial surface proteins, such as S-layer proteins, suggests that this protein is cell-wall associated. It is proposed that ButB plays a role in the export of But from the producing organism.    The comK gene is a regulatory transcription unit which is essential for the development of genetic competence in Bacillus subtilis. The transcription of comK is under strict nutritional and growth phase-dependent control and has been shown to depend on the gene products of comA and srfA. In this report, we show that expression of comK is dependent on its own gene product as well as on the gene products of all other tested regulatory genes known to be involved in competence development (abrB, comA, comP, degU, sin, spo0A, spo0H, spo0K, and srfA). A mecA mutation is able to suppress the competence deficiency of mutations in any of these regulatory loci except for mutations in spo0A and, as we show here, in comK. Furthermore, we show that the presence of comK on a multiple copy plasmid leads to derepression of comK expression, causing an almost constitutive expression of competence in minimal medium as well as permitting competence development in complex medium. We infer from these results that the signals which trigger competence development, after having been received and processed by the various components of the competence signal transduction pathway, all converge at the level of comK expression. As soon as derepression of comK expression occurs, the positive autoregulation rapidly results in accumulation of the comK gene product, which subsequently induces competence.    comK, which encodes the competence transcription factor, is itself transcriptionally activated at the transition from exponential growth to stationary phase in Bacillus subtilis. MecA, a negative regulator of competence, also inhibits comK transcription when overexpressed, and a mecA null mutation results in comK overexpression. Although null mutations in mecA, as well as in another gene, mecB, are known to bypass the requirements for nearly all of the competence regulatory genes, the comK requirement is not suppressed by mecA inactivation. Various competence regulatory genes (comA, srfA, degU, abrB, sin, and spo0A) are shown to be required for the expression of comK. srfA transcription is shown to occur equally in cells destined for competence and those destined not to become competent. In contrast, comK transcription is restricted to the presumptive competent cells. These and other results are combined to describe a regulatory pathway for competence.    A fragment of the Lactococcus lactis chromosome containing an open reading frame of 265 codons, denoted bglR, has been characterized. The polypeptide encoded by bglR shares 36 to 30% sequence identity with a family of regulatory proteins including ArbG from Erwinia chrysanthemi, BglG from Escherichia coli, and SacT and SacY from Bacillus subtilis. These regulatory proteins are involved in positive control of the utilization of different sugars by transcription antitermination. For some of these regulatory proteins it has been demonstrated that antitermination is exerted by binding to a conserved RNA sequence, partially overlapping the transcription terminator and thus preventing transcription termination. Upstream of bglR, we identified a transcription terminator whose 5&apos; end was overlapped by a 32-bp sequence, highly homologous to the RNA-binding site that is conserved in other regulatory systems. Constitutive expression of bglR in E. coli increased the expression of a bglG::lacZ transcriptional fusion. The fact that that the expression of BglG is autoregulated in E. coli suggests that BglG and BglR are functionally equivalent. In L. lactis, we observed that (i) the expression of a bglR::lacZ fusion is increased by beta-glucoside sugars, (ii) disruption of bglR impairs growth on some beta-glucosides, and (iii) the expression of bglR is positively autoregulated. Because of these structural and functional similarities between BglR and the transcription antiterminators of the BglG family, we propose that BglR may be the lactococcal counterpart of the E. coli BglG regulator of beta-glucoside utilization.    Expression of the Bacillus subtilis hut operon is induced by histidine and subject to regulation by carbon catabolite repression and amino acid repression. A set of hut-lacZ transcriptional fusions was constructed and used to identify the cis-acting sites required for histidine induction and amino acid repression. Histidine induction was found to be primarily mediated by transcriptional antitermination at a palindromic sequence located immediately downstream of the first structural gene in the hut operon, hutP. High levels of histidine induction were observed only in hut-lacZ fusions which contained this palindromic sequence. The hutC1 mutation, which results in constitutive expression of the hut operon, was sequenced and found to contain a GC to TA transversion located within the stem-loop structure. Transcription of hut DNA in vitro revealed that the palindromic structure functions as a transcriptional terminator with wild-type hut DNA but not with hutC1 DNA. Two sites were found to be involved in amino acid repression of hut expression: (i) an operator, hutOA, which lies downstream of the hut promoter, and (ii) the hut terminator. The rate of [14C]histidine uptake in amino acid-grown cells was sixfold lower than that seen in cells grown without amino acids. Thus, inhibition of histidine transport in amino acid-grown cells indirectly regulates hut expression by interfering with histidine induction at the hut terminator.    The spo0J gene of Bacillus subtilis is required for the initiation of sporulation. We show that the sporulation defect caused by null mutations in spo0J is suppressed by a null mutation in the gene located directly upstream from spo0J, soj (suppressor of spo0J). These results indicate that Soj inhibits the initiation of sporulation and that Spo0J antagonizes that inhibition. Further genetic experiments indicated that Soj ultimately affects sporulation by inhibiting the activation (phosphorylation) of the developmental transcription factor encoded by spo0A. In addition, the temperature-sensitive sporulation phenotype caused by the ftsA279 (spoIIN279) mutation was partly suppressed by the soj null mutation, indicating that FtsA might also affect the activity of Soj. Soj and Spo0J are known to be similar in sequence to a family of proteins involved in plasmid partitioning, including ParA and ParB of prophage P1, SopA and SopB of F, and IncC and KorB of RK2, spo0J was found to be required for normal chromosome partitioning as well as for sporulation. spo0J null mutants produced a significant proportion of anucleate cells during vegetative growth. The dual functions of Spo0J could provide a mechanism for regulating the initiation of sporulation in response to activity of the chromosome partition machinery.    The role of a 20 bp conserved region located 45-64 nucleotides 5&apos; of the spoVA transcription start point in Bacillus subtilis and Bacillus licheniformis was investigated by deletion analysis and by mobility shift assay. Deletions 5&apos; of this conserved sequence had little effect on expression of a spoVA-lacZ fusion, whereas deletions extending into the sequence reduced expression of the spoVA-lacZ fusion by 85%. The timing of expression of spoVA was not affected by deletion of the sequence. The region was shown by mobility shift assays to bind specifically to a protein. Binding activity was detected in protein extracts prepared from bacteria 1 h or more after they had started to sporulate, but not in extracts prepared from vegetative bacteria. Mutations in all known spoO loci were screened but none prevented appearance of the binding activity; nor did mutations in any of the stage II and III loci tested. It is concluded that the 20 bp conserved region is the binding site of an activator that is subject to temporal regulation independent of known spo loci.    Five of the genes known to encode the synthesis of poly(glycerol phosphate), the major teichoic acid of Bacillus subtilis 168, are organized in two divergently transcribed operons (a divergon), denoted tagAB and tagDEF. To monitor their expression, the 399 bp intergenic region separating the first structural genes of these operons was fused, in both orientations, to a lacZ reporter gene, allowing measurement of promoter activity under specific physiological conditions. Under all experimental conditions, tagA and tagD appeared coordinately expressed, the level of tagD being always higher than that of tagA. No influence of the chromosomal context was observed. Phosphate limitation was accompanied by reduced tag gene expression. Following the onset of sporulation, expression of tag genes diminished rapidly and was essentially abolished by stage II. During germination, the activity of tag genes was detectable before the rise in culture turbidity associated with spore outgrowth. In contrast to tagC (dinC), the expression of which is DNA-damage-inducible, the induction of SOS functions had no effect on tagA and tagD gene expression. The biological significance of these results is discussed.    The nucleotide sequence of the Leuconostoc lactis 533 cryptic plasmid pCI411 (2926 bp) was determined. Analysis revealed the presence of three open reading frames (ORFs). ORF 1 was capable of encoding a 24.9 kDa peptide which shared homology with the replication initiation protein (RepB) from a number of Gram-positive rolling circle plasmids. ORF 2 could encode a peptide of 6.6 kDa which was homologous to the RepC protein of the lactococcal plasmid pWV01. A function could not be assigned to ORF 3, which was capable of encoding a 12.1 kDa peptide. Transcription-translation analysis indicated the presence of three peptides of the predicted molecular masses. A putative double strand origin of replication (DSO) was identified which showed strong similarity with the DSO of a number of Gram-positive plasmids including pE194 from Staphylococcus. Structural analysis identified a number of direct and indirect repeats in addition to putative recombination-specific sites (RSA and RSB) in the non-coding region of pCI411. The observed characteristics suggest that this plasmid replicates using the rolling circle mechanism. pCI411, which could be introduced into Leuconostoc, Lactococcus, Streptococcus, Lactobacillus and Bacillus is the first plasmid from the genus Leuconostoc to be characterized in such detail.    The stable RNAs, whose sequences are homologous to 10Sa RNA of Escherichia coli, have been isolated from Mycoplasma capricolum and Bacillus subtilis, both belonging to the Gram-positive bacterial group. The total nucleotide sequences of the RNAs have been determined by partial RNA sequencing and DNA sequencing of their genes. A comparison of the sequences, together with those of other bacterial 10Sa RNAs so far known, has shown that the 5&apos;- and 3&apos;-end sequences are well conserved among species, while the central parts reveal little homologies. Unexpectedly, the conserved 5&apos;- and 3&apos;-regions can be folded in a common tRNA-like structure containing an amino acid-acceptor stem and a T phi C-stem/loop. The 3&apos;-terminal CCA sequence of B.subtilis 10Sa RNA is not encoded on the DNA, but is added after transcription. Furthermore, the RNA is aminoacylatable with alanine in vitro, and binds to the 70S ribosome in vivo.    A Campylobacter jejuni gene, designated hup, that appears to encode a homolog of the histone-like DNA-binding protein, HU, has been cloned, sequenced and expressed in Escherichia coli. Immunoblotting and in vitro transcription/translation analyses revealed a 11-kDa protein that was produced by recombinant plasmids containing hup. The gene contains an open reading frame (ORF) sufficient to encode a protein of 98 amino acids (aa) with a calculated molecular mass of 10,267 Da and a predicted isoelectric point of 10.1. The deduced aa sequence of the protein, designated HCj, exhibits considerable sequence identity with members of the HU family of proteins from other eubacterial species. The transcription start point was identified by primer extension analysis and appropriately spaced promoter sequences were found which exhibit considerable similarity to E. coli and Bacillus promoters. Southern hybridization analyses indicate that C. jejuni has a single copy of hup.    Transcription of the levanase operon of Bacillus subtilis is controlled by LevR, an activator of the NifA/NtrC family of regulators. An upstream activating sequence (UAS) located in a 16 bp palindromic structure has previously been characterized. LevR was overproduced in B. subtilis and interaction between the activator and the UAS was demonstrated by gel shift and footprint experiments. The LevR protein specifically binds to the two-halves of the palindromic structure centered at -125 bases upstream from the transcriptional start site. In addition, footprint analysis suggests that LevR interacts with a third DNA region located at positions -90 to -80. To investigate the function of the different domains of the LevR activator, stop codons were introduced at various positions in the levR gene. The ability of the truncated LevR polypeptides to activate transcription, to respond to the inducer or to interact with the UAS was tested. The results obtained suggest that LevR is a multidomain protein. The amino-terminal part of the protein is required for DNA binding whereas the central domain allows the activation of transcription. The carboxy-terminal region is involved in the modulation of the LevR activity by the inducer.    sigma E, an RNA polymerase sigma factor of apparent M(r) 28,000, was previously identified by its ability to direct transcription from the P2 promoter of the agarose gene (dagA) of Streptomyces coelicolor. A degenerate oligonucleotide probe, designed from the N-terminal sequence of purified sigma E, was used to isolate the sigma E gene (sigE). The predicted sequence of sigma E shows greatest similarity to sequences of seven other proteins: Myxococcus xanthus CarQ, Pseudomonas aeruginosa AlgU, Pseudomonas syringae HrpL, Escherichia coli sigma E, Alcaligenes eutrophus CnrH, E. coli FecI, and Bacillus subtilis SigX, a protein of unknown function. These eight proteins define a subfamily of eubacterial RNA polymerase factors sufficiently different from other sigma s that, in many cases, they are not identified by standard similarity searching methods. Available information suggests that all of them regulate extracytoplasmic functions and that they function as effector molecules responding to extracytoplasmic stimuli. A. eutrophus CnrH appears to be a plasmid-encoded factor.    Partial amino acid sequences of the two alcohol dehydrogenases of Bacillus stearothermophilus and the oligonucleotide sequence of a cloned fragment containing the gene for ADH 2334 were determined and compared with the known, derived ADH 1503 amino acid sequence. The two proteins are identical at 244 of 349 positions. ADH 2334 is encoded in a transcription unit containing an aldehyde dehydrogenase.    In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the transport of ammonium across the plasma membrane for use as a nitrogen source is mediated by at least two functionally distinct transport systems whose respective encoding genes are called MEP1 and MEP2. Mutations in the MEP2 gene affect high affinity, low capacity ammonium transport while mutations in the MEP1 gene disrupt a lower affinity, higher capacity system. In this work, the MEP1 gene has been cloned and sequenced and its expression analyzed. The predicted amino acid sequence reveals a highly hydrophobic, 54 kDa protein with 10 or 11 putative membrane-spanning regions. The predicted Mep1p protein shares high sequence similarity with several bacterial proteins of unknown function, notably the product of the nitrogen-regulated nrgA gene of Bacillus subtilis, and with that of a partial cDNA sequence derived from Caenorhabditis elegans. The Mep1p and related proteins appear to define a new family of transmembrane proteins evolutionarily conserved in at least bacteria, fungi and animals. The MEP1 gene is most highly expressed when the cells are grown on low concentrations of ammonium or on &apos;poor&apos; nitrogen sources like urea or proline. It is down-regulated, on the other hand, when the concentration of ammonium is high or when other &apos;good&apos; nitrogen sources like glutamine or asparagine are supplied in the culture medium. The overall properties of Mep1p indicate that it is a transporter of ammonium. Its main function appears to be to enable cells grown under nitrogen-limiting conditions to incorporate ammonium present at relatively low concentrations in the growth medium.    The two Bacillus anthracis toxins are composed of three proteins, protective antigen, lethal factor, and edema factor. The structural genes for these three components are located on the virulence plasmid pXO1. We constructed transcriptional fusions between the regulatory region of each of these genes and lacZ. Each construct was then inserted as a single copy at the corresponding toxin gene locus on pXO1, resulting in three isogenic strains. Two environmental factors, bicarbonate and temperature, were found to induce beta-galactosidase synthesis in each recombinant strain. Furthermore, the transcription of the three toxin genes appears to be coordinately regulated.    The Bacillus thuringiensis spo0F gene was identified by chromosomal DNA sequencing of sporulation mutants derived from a B. thuringiensis transposon insertion library. A spo0F defect in B. thuringiensis, which was suppressed by multicopy hknA or kinA, resulted in the overproduction of the CryIIIA insecticidal crystal protein.    Expression of the Bacillus thuringiensis cryIIIA gene encoding a Coleoptera-specific toxin is weak during vegetative growth and is activated at the onset of the stationary phase. cryIIIA&apos;-&apos;lacZ fusions and primer extension analysis show that the regulation of cryIIIA expression is similar in Bacillus subtilis and in B. thuringiensis. Activation of cryIIIA expression was not altered in B. subtilis mutant strains deficient for the sigma H and sigma E sporulation-specific sigma factors or for minor sigma factors such as sigma B, sigma D, or sigma L. This result and the nucleotide sequence of the -35 and -10 regions of the cryIIIA promoter suggest that cryIIIA expression might be directed by the E sigma A form of RNA polymerase. Expression of the cryIIIA&apos;-&apos;lacZ fusion is shut off after t2 (2 h after time zero) of sporulation in the B. subtilis wild-type strain grown on nutrient broth sporulation medium. However, no decrease in cryIIIA-directed beta-galactosidase activity occurred in sigma H, kinA, or spo0A mutant strains. Moreover, beta-galactosidase activity was higher and remained elevated after t2 in the spo0A mutant strain. beta-Galactosidase activity was weak in abrB and spo0A abrB mutant strains, suggesting that AbrB is responsible for the higher level of cryIIIA expression observed in a spo0A mutant. However, both in spo0A and spo0A abrB mutant strains, beta-galactosidase activity remained elevated after t2, suggesting that even in the absence of AbrB, cryIIIA expression is controlled through modulation of the phosphorylated form of Spo0A.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    The Bacillus subtilis citrate synthase genes citA and citZ were repressed during early exponential growth phase in nutrient broth medium and were induced as cells reached the end of exponential phase. Both genes were also induced by treatment of cells with the drug decoyinine. After induction, the steady-state level of citZ mRNA was about five times higher than that of citA mRNA. At least some of the citZ transcripts read through into the isocitrate dehydrogenase (citC) gene. Transcription from an apparent promoter site located near the 3&apos; end of the citZ gene also contributed to expression of citC. In minimal medium, citA transcription was about 6-fold lower when glucose was the sole carbon source than it was when succinate was the carbon source. Expression of the citZ gene was repressed 2-fold by glucose and 10-fold when glucose and glutamate were present simultaneously. This latter synergistic repression is similar to the effect of glucose and glutamate on steady-state citrate synthase enzyme activity. CitR, a protein of the LysR family, appeared to be a repressor of citA but not of citZ.    Two distinct Bacillus subtilis genes (citA and citZ) were found to encode citrate synthase isozymes that catalyze the first step of the Krebs cycle. The citA gene was cloned by genetic complementation of an Escherichia coli citrate synthase mutant strain (W620) and was in a monocistronic transcriptional unit. A divergently transcribed gene, citR, could encode a protein with strong similarity to the bacterial LysR family of regulatory proteins. A null mutation in citA had little effect on citrate synthase enzyme activity or sporulation. The residual citrate synthase activity was purified from a citA null mutant strain, and the partial amino acid sequence for the purified protein (CitZ) was determined. The citZ gene was cloned from B. subtilis chromosomal DNA by using a PCR-generated probe synthesized with oligonucleotide primers derived from the partial amino acid sequence of purified CitZ. The citZ gene proved to be the first gene in a tricistronic cluster that also included citC (coding for isocitrate dehydrogenase) and citH (coding for malate dehydrogenase). A mutation in citZ caused a substantial loss of citrate synthase enzyme activity, glutamate auxotrophy, and a defect in sporulation.    The regulation of flagellin gene expression in Bacillus subtilis was examined in vivo by means of a lacZ translational fusion to the flagellin structural gene (hag). We have tested the effects of two known mutations (flaA4 and flaA15) in the major flagellar operon and of three deletions. One deletion was in frame in the fliI cistron, one was out of frame in the fliK cistron, and the last spanned about 21 kb of the flaA operon. In all instances, the expression of the flagellin gene was defective. Flagellin gene expression was restored in the strain with the 21-kb deletion by overexpression of the sigD gene under control of the isopropyl-beta-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG)-inducible spac promoter. These results indicate that transcription of the flagellin gene is dependent on the formation of the flagellar basal body but that such a requirement can be bypassed by overexpression of sigD. Lack of expression of hag was observed in the presence of flaD1, flaD2, and delta sin mutations as well.    The Bacillus subtilis tyrS gene is a member of a group of gram-positive aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase and amino acid biosynthesis genes which are regulated by transcription antitermination. Each gene in the group is specifically induced by limitation for the appropriate amino acid. This response is mediated by interaction of the cognate tRNA with the mRNA leader region to promote formation of an antiterminator structure. The tRNA interacts with the leader by codon-anticodon pairing at a position designated the specifier sequence which is upstream of the antiterminator. In this study, an additional site of possible contact between the tRNA and the leader was identified through covariation of leader mRNA and tRNA sequences. Mutations in the acceptor end of tRNA(Tyr) could suppress mutations in the side bulge of the antiterminator, in a pattern consistent with base pairing. This base pairing may thereby directly affect the formation and/or function of the antiterminator. The discriminator position of the tRNA, an important identity determinant for a number of tRNAs, including tRNA(Tyr), was shown to act as a second specificity determinant for assuring response to the appropriate tRNA. Furthermore, overproduction of an unchargeable variant of tRNA(Tyr) resulted in antitermination in the absence of limitation for tyrosine, supporting the proposal that uncharged tRNA is the effector in this system.    The sigma D form of RNA polymerase from Bacillus subtilis has been shown previously to direct the synthesis of several transcription units bearing genes for flagellin, motility proteins, and autolysins. In this report, we describe an operon of genes transcribed from the sigma D-dependent promoter PD-1. We have identified three complete open reading frames and one partial one downstream of this promoter; immediately upstream is the previously identified comF locus. The PD-1 operon encodes the presumptive B. subtilis homologs of two Salmonella typhimurium late flagellar genes, flgM and flgK. Also present in this operon are two genes of unknown function, orf139 and orf160, whose products show similarities to the eukaryotic cytoskeletal proteins myosin and vimentin, respectively. orf139 and orf160 may encode proteins that form extended alpha-helical secondary structures and coiled-coil quaternary structures which may be filamentous components of the gram-positive bacterial flagellum. We have characterized the B. subtilis flgM gene further by constructing an in-frame deletion mutation, flgM delta 80, and creating strains of B. subtilis in which this allele has replaced the wild-type copy. By primer extension analysis of cellular RNA, we have shown that the flgM delta 80 mutation relieves the block to transcription of two other sigma D-dependent operons imposed by an unlinked mutation in a gene directing early flagellar synthesis. We conclude that, as in the case of S. typhimurium, early flagellar synthesis in B. subtilis is coupled to late flagellar synthesis through repression of sigma D-dependent transcription by the flgM gene product.    Xylose utilization in Bacillus licheniformis is inducible by xylose. We establish here that the Xyl repressor recognizes and binds an xyl operator sequence located 12 nucleotides downstream from the transcription start site of the xyl operon. DNA-retardation experiments employing xyl regulatory DNA and soluble protein extracts indicate complex formation in the presence of Xyl repressor. Two repressor-operator complexes are distinguished by different gel mobilities. They yield the same in situ copper-phenanthroline footprint. This result suggests that a single xyl operator may be bound by different oligomers of Xyl repressor. Methylation and hydroxyl radical cleavage protection of the xyl operator by Xyl repressor binding and ethylation interference of Xyl repressor binding to the xyl operator reveals symmetrical interaction of the repressor with two half sites of the operator, which show palindromic symmetry and are located on the same side of the B-form DNA structure.    The csa-15 locus of Bacillus subtilis corresponds to an operon encoding proteins which display features characteristic of the ABC group of transporters. Sequence analysis reveals a very high level of identity to the ribose transport operon of Escherichia coli. This hypothesis is supported by the observation that strains carrying mutagenic insertions in this operon are unable to grow on ribose as sole carbon source. Expression of this operon is directed by a single SigA-type promoter which is negatively regulated by Spo0A during the late-exponential/transition state of the growth cycle. Expression is also subject to catabolite repression and this mode of regulation is dominant to control of expression by Spo0A.    The Bacillus subtilis acsA (acetyl coenzyme A synthetase) and acuABC (acetoin utilization) genes were previously identified in the region downstream from the ccpA gene, which encodes a protein required for catabolite repression of the amyE (alpha-amylase) gene. The acsA and acuABC genes are divergently transcribed, with only 20 bp separating the -35 sequences of their promoters. Expression of these genes was maximal in stationary phase and was repressed by the addition of glucose to the growth medium. Two sites resembling amyO, the cis-acting regulatory target site for amyE, were identified in the acsA and acuABC promoter regions. Glucose repression of acsA and acuABC transcription was dependent on both CcpA and the amyO-like sequences.    At least 18 aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase and amino acid biosynthesis genes in several Gram-positive genera appear to be regulated by a common transcription antitermination mechanism. Each gene is induced by limitation for the appropriate amino acid, and not by general amino acid limitation. The mRNA leader regions of these genes exhibit extensive structural conservation. Characterization of the Bacillus subtilis tyrS gene revealed that uncharged tyrosyl-tRNA promotes readthrough of a leader-region terminator; a conformational switch in the leader mRNA between a terminator structure and an antiterminator structure is postulated to mediate antitermination. Two sites of interaction between the tRNA and the leader have been identified by genetic analysis: the tRNA anticodon interacts with a single codon displayed at a precise position in the leader-region structure, and the acceptor end of the tRNA interacts with a side-bulge on the antiterminator.    The pattern of transcription has been examined for a cluster of genes encoding polypeptides some or all of which are assembled into a cross-linked component of the Bacillus subtilis spore coat. Three promoters, designated PVWX, PX and PYZ, were indicated by reverse transcriptase mapping. On the basis of Northern hybridization, it appeared that the cotV, W and X genes were transcribed as a polycistronic mRNA from PVWX as well as a monocistronic cotX mRNA from Px. The cotY and cotZ genes are cotranscribed from the PYZ promoter with a smaller cotY mRNA resulting from premature termination or RNA processing. All four transcripts were synthesized late during sporulation and were not produced in mutants lacking sigma K, which directs RNA polymerase to transcribe genes in the mother-cell compartment of sporulating cells. The DNA-binding protein GerE, which affects transcription of many genes in the mother cell during the late stages of sporulation, was also shown to be involved. There was essentially no cotX mRNA in a gerE mutant and the amounts of cotVWX, cotYZ and cotY mRNAs were somewhat reduced. In vitro run-off transcription studies with sigma K RNA polymerase and GerE confirmed the presence of the three promoters, and directly showed that GerE was necessary for transcription from PX as well as enhanced transcription from the PVWX and PYZ promoters. The DNase I footprints of GerE for all three promoters were immediately upstream of the -35 regions. These GerE binding sites were compared to those in other GerE-responsive promoters and a larger consensus sequence for GerE binding was recognized. This complex transcriptional pattern of the cotVWXYZ cluster is probably necessary to ensure that an optimal amount of each protein is made for the assembly of the spore coat.    Sequence-specific 1H and 15N NMR1 assignments are reported for the transcription factor 1 (TF1), a 22-kDa type II DNA-binding protein (DBPII) that consists of two 99-residue monomers. An assignment strategy is employed that uses six complementary selectively deuterium-labeled TF1 variants and an uniformly 15N-labeled TF1 variant. Two-dimensional and three-dimensional homonuclear and heteronuclear NMR correlated spectra are analyzed and yield nearly complete assignments for the 1H and 15N resonances. Discrete protein secondary structure domains are also defined; in each monomer, three alpha-helices, an antiparallel beta-sheet, and an antiparallel beta-ribbon are identified. Analyses of two dimers formed from two distinct selectively deuteriated monomers serve to identify a number of interproton contacts as either intermonomeric or intramonomeric. An analysis of amide proton exchange reveals that the carboxy-terminal alpha-helix is less stable than the other two alpha-helices in each monomer. A previously proposed working structural model of the TF1 dimer [Geiduschek et al. (1990) J. Struct. Biol. 104, 84-90], based on the crystal structure of a highly homologous DBPII, the Bacillus stearothermophilus-encoded HU protein, is generally supported by our results. Several departures from this model, however, are noted. Most notably, the carboxy-terminal tail of TF1 adopts an alpha-helical conformation with a backbone distortion at Lys93.    It has been proposed that uncharged tRNA molecules may act as positive regulatory factors to control the expression of a number of operons in Bacillus subtilis and related bacteria by interacting with leader sequences to cause antitermination. In this study we report the isolation and characterization of regulatory mutations that modify one of the tRNA molecules predicted to have such a regulatory role. Three different alleles of the B. subtilis leucine tRNA gene leuG were found that resulted in higher expression of the ilv-leu biosynthetic operon. Each resulted in a base change in the D-loop of the leucine tRNA molecule with the anticodon 5&apos;-GAG-3&apos; (leucine tRNAGAG). Experiments with strains that are diploid for mutant and wild-type alleles suggested that both charged and uncharged tRNA molecules may interact with leader sequences to control expression of the operon.    The spoIIA operon of Bacillus subtilis encodes sigma F and two proteins that may regulate sigma factor activity. High level induction of the tricistronic spoIIA operon occurs early during spore formation. At later times, the locus is cotranscribed with the upstream gene dacF, which encodes a putative DD-carboxypeptidase. In this study, the regulation of dacF-spoIIA transcription has been analyzed. Expression of a dacF-lacZ transcriptional fusion during sporulation required sigma F but not the later-expressed sporulation-associated sigma factors. Induction of sigma F synthesis during vegetative growth caused expression of dacF-lacZ fusions. The dacF-spoIIA promoter sequence is similar to sequences of previously identified sigma F promoters. It is concluded that dacF-spoIIA is transcribed by E sigma F. We present evidence that dacF-spoIIA is also transcribed by E sigma G, as is the case for the three other promoters known to be transcribed by E sigma F.    Bacterial spores are highly resistant to killing by UV radiation and exhibit unique DNA photochemistry. UV irradiation of spore DNA results in formation of spore photoproduct (SP), the thymine dimer 5-thyminyl-5,6-dihydrothymine. Repair of SP occurs during germination of Bacillus subtilis spores by two distinct routes, either by the general nucleotide excision repair (uvr) pathway or by a novel SP-specific monomerization reaction mediated by the enzyme SP lyase, which is encoded by the spl gene. Repair of SP occurs early in spore germination and is independent of de novo protein synthesis, suggesting that the SP repair enzymes are synthesized during sporulation and are packaged in the dormant spore. To test this hypothesis, the expression of a translational spl-lacZ fusion integrated at the spl locus was monitored during B. subtilis growth and sporulation. beta-Galactosidase expression from the spl-lacZ fusion was silent during vegetative growth and was not DNA damage inducible, but it was activated at morphological stage III of sporulation specifically in the forespore compartment, coincident with activation of expression of the stage III marker enzyme glucose dehydrogenase. Expression of the spl-lacZ fusion was shown to be dependent upon the sporulation-specific RNA polymerase containing the sigma-G factor (E sigma G), as spl-lacZ expression was abolished in a mutant harboring a deletion in the sigG gene and restored by expression of the sigG gene in trans. Primer extension analysis of spl mRNA revealed a major extension product initiating upstream from a small open reading frame of unknown function which precedes spl, and it revealed two other shorter minor extension products.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    During sporulation of Bacillus subtilis, proteolytic activation of pro-sigma K and ensuing sigma K-dependent gene expression normally require the activity of many sporulation gene products. We report here that overproducing pro-sigma K at the onset of sporulation substantially uncouples sigma K-dependent gene expression from its normal dependency. Overproducing pro-sigma K in strains with a mutation in spoIIIG, spoIIIA, spoIIIE, or spoIVB partially restored sigma K-dependent gene expression in the mother cell and resulted in accumulation of a small amount of polypeptide that comigrated with sigma K, but these mutants still failed to form spores. In contrast, sporulation of spoIVF mutants was greatly enhanced by pro-sigma K overproduction. The products of the spoIVF operon are made in the mother cell and normally govern pro-sigma K processing, but overproduction of pro-sigma K appears to allow accumulation of a small amount of sigma K, which is sufficient to partially restore mother cell gene expression and spore formation. This spoIVF-independent mechanism for processing pro-sigma K depends on sigma E, an earlier-acting mother cell-specific sigma factor. The spoIIID gene, which encodes a mother cell-specific DNA-binding protein that is normally required for pro-sigma K production, was shown to be required for efficient pro-sigma K processing as well. bof (bypass of forespore) mutations bypassed this requirement for spoIIID, suggesting that SpoIIID is less directly involved in pro-sigma K processing than are spoIVF gene products.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    The promoter region of the cryIIIA toxin gene of Bacillus thuringiensis is composed of at least three domains: an upstream region extending from nucleotide positions -635 to -553 (with reference to the translational start codon of cryIIIA), an internal region extending from nucleotide positions -553 to -367, and a downstream region extending from nucleotide position -367 to +18. Deletion analysis and transcriptional fusions to the lacZ gene indicate that full expression of cryIIIA requires the association of the upstream and the downstream region. Primer extension experiments reveal a major cryIIIA transcript (designated T-129) starting at nucleotide position -129 and another transcript (designated T-558) starting at nucleotide position -558. Mutation in the -35 region of the promoter responsible for the initiation of T-558 indicates that the upstream promoter is essential for full expression of cryIIIA, although not sufficient. Deletion of the DNA region carrying the previously described cryIIIA promoter does not affect full expression of cryIIIA and does not modify the 5&apos; end of T-129. Taken together, these results indicate that the 5&apos; end of T-129 is not a trnascriptional start site. Therefore, we propose that T-129 results from the processing of the mRNA initiated at the upstream promoter (T-558), generating a stable mRNA with a 5&apos; extremity at nucleotide position -129. From primer extension analysis and transcriptional fusions to lacZ, it appears that the upstream promoter is weakly but significantly expressed during the vegetative phase of growth, is activated at the onset of sporulation and remains active at least until t5. However, unlike the promoters of other cry genes, this promoter is similar to sigma A-dependent promoters rather than sporulation-specific promoters. This promoter may therefore be transcribed by the E sigma A form of RNA polymerase. Activation at the onset of sporulation could result from the disappearance of a repressor, or the appearance of a stationary-phase-specific activator.    Regulatory factors that initiate forespore-specific transcription during Bacillus subtilis sporulation respond to adenosine nucleotide ratios.    A grpE heat-shock gene was found by sequencing in the genome of the methanogenic archaeon Methanosarcina mazei S-6. It is the first example of grpE from the phylogenetic domain Archaea. Since the other seven sequenced homologs are from the domain Bacteria, it may be concluded that grpE appeared early in evolution, before the two domains separated. The archaeal grpE is located in the dnaK locus, 431 base-pairs upstream of dnaK, which is followed downstream by the dnaJ gene. The organization of these three genes is known for Bacillus subtilis, Clostridium acetobutylicum, Borrelia burgdorferi and Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The archaeal locus organization, grpE-dnaK-dnaJ, is similar to that of the former three bacteria, but different from that of M. tuberculosis. This, and sequence homologies, suggest that the M. tuberculosis GrpE belongs, together with the Streptomyces coelicolor homolog, to a subgroup of the GrpE proteins. The M. mazei grpE gene encodes a protein of 209 amino acid residues. The deduced amino acid sequence shows 28.2 to 34.6% identities, and 50.3 to 58.9 similarities (identities plus conservative substitutions) with the other six complete GrpE sequences available. These percentages fall within the range observed for the other GrpEs. Two regions in the second and fourth quarters of the GrpE molecule show higher homology, particularly in three stretches of nine, six and nine amino acid residues, respectively. The archaeal gene uses all codons but three, whereas the bacterial homologs lack higher numbers of codons. The M. mazei grpE responded to heat-shock by increasing transcription, in a manner similar to that of the nearby heat-shock gene dnaK.    The tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase gene (tyrZ) from Thiobacillus ferrooxidans, an acidophilic, autotrophic, gram-negative bacterium that participates in bioleaching of minerals, was cloned and sequenced. The encoded polypeptide (TyrRZ) is 407 amino acids in length (molecular mass; 38 kDa). The predicted protein sequence has an extensive overall identity (44%) to the sequence of the protein encoded by the Bacillus subtilus tyrZ gene, one of the two genes encoding tyrosyl-tRNA synthetases in this microorganism. Alignment with Escherichia coli TyrRS revealed limited overall identity (24%), except in the regions of the signature sequence for class I aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Complementation of an E. coli strain with a thermosensitive mutation in TyrRS showed that the protein encoded by the T. ferrooxidans tyrZ gene is functional and recognizes the E. coli tRNA(Tyr) as a substrate. TyrZ is a single-copy gene as revealed by Southern blot analysis. The gene was localized upstream from the putative promoters of the rrnT2 ribosomal RNA operon. Although no rho-independent transcription terminator was found between the two genes, a 1.3-kb RNA hybridized to a DNA probe derived from the tyrZ gene. The functional relationship between these two transcription units is discussed.    The expression of competence genes in Bacillus subtilis is controlled by a signal transduction cascade which increases the expression of a competence transcription factor (CTF, encoded by comK) during the transition from exponential growth to stationary phase. The transcription of CTF (ComK) is decreased by the product of the mecA gene, and this inhibition is relieved in response to an unknown signal received from upstream in the regulatory pathway. Inactivation of either mecA or another gene, mecB, results in overproduction of ComK. We show here that the concentration of MecA protein does not vary markedly with culture medium, as a function of growth stage, or in competent and noncompetent cells. We also show that MecA can interact directly with ComK. Finally, evidence is presented suggesting that MecB functions prior to MecA in the signaling pathway. A model is discussed which involves the sequestration of ComK by MecA binding and the release of the transcription factor when an appropriate signal is relayed to MecA by MecB.    The Spo0A transcription factor is responsible for the initiation of sporulation and is active in transcription only after phosphorylation by a specific signal transduction pathway, the phosphorelay. The effect of phosphorylation on the physical properties of Spo0A was determined. Spo0A and Spo0A approximately P both behaved as monomers during Sephacryl chromatography and gel electrophoresis, suggesting that phosphorylation did not modify the oligomerization state of the protein. Trypsin digested Spo0A at a single cleavage site between residues 142 and 143 within a hinge connecting two tightly folded domains. The amino domain retains ability to be phosphorylated by the phosphorelay. The carboxyl domain is active as a DNA-binding protein and retains the sequence specificity of the intact molecule for 0A boxes on the abrB promoter as revealed by footprinting studies. The carboxyl domain stimulated in vitro transcription from the spoIIG promoter 5-fold greater than an equal amount of Spo0A and about half as well as equivalent amounts of Spo0A approximately P. Thus, the unphosphorylated amino domain inhibits the transcription stimulation activity of the carboxyl domain. We suggest that phosphorylation activates transcription regulation functions of Spo0A by modifying the spatial relationships of the amino and carboxyl domains.    A filter binding assay was developed to study interactions between purified TRAP, the trp RNA-binding attenuation protein of Bacillus subtilis, and trp specific transcripts. TRAP formed stable complexes with trpEDCFBA leader RNA; binding was L-tryptophan-dependent and was complete within 60 s. TRAP binds to a segment of the trp leader transcript that includes part of an RNA antiterminator structure. Binding to this segment allows formation of an RNA terminator structure, thereby promoting transcription termination. Using several trpEDCFBA leader deletion transcripts, we identified several closely spaced trinucleotide repeats (seven GAG and four UAG repeats) in the trp leader transcript that appeared to be required for TRAP binding. We also showed that TRAP binds to a segment of the trpG transcript that includes the trpG ribosome binding site; the nucleotide sequence of this segment contains several appropriately spaced trinucleotide repeats (seven GAG, one UAG, and one AAG). TRAP binding to the trpG transcript would block translation initiation. RNA footprint analysis confirmed interaction between TRAP and the trinucleotide repeats in the various transcripts. TRAP, in the presence or absence of L-tryptophan, appears to consist of 11 or 12 identical 8-kDa subunits. Our findings suggest that each tryptophan-activated TRAP subunit can bind one G/UAG repeat in a target transcript. Multiple protein-RNA interactions are required for stable association.    spo0A and spo0H are needed for the initiation of sporulation and for the development of genetic competence in Bacillus subtilis. Transcription of spo0A initiates from two promoters, Pv and Ps. Pv is active during vegetative growth and is recognized by RNA polymerase containing sigma A. Expression from Ps increases during sporulation and depends on sigma H, the spo0H gene product. A deletion mutation, spo0A delta Ps, that removes the promoter controlled by sigma H blocked sporulation but had no detectable effect on competence. These results indicate that expression of spo0A from Ps is necessary for sporulation and that the requirement for spo0H in competence development is not due to its role in expression of spo0A.    A complete transcript of the Bacillus subtilis pyr operon contains the following elements in 5&apos; to 3&apos; order: a 151-nucleotide (nt) untranslated leader; pyrR, encoding a 20-kDa protein; a 173-nt intercistronic region; pyrP, encoding a 46-kDa protein; a 145-nt intercistronic region; and eight overlapping cistrons encoding all of the six enzymes for de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis. Transcription is controlled by the availability of pyrimidines via an attenuation mechanism. There are three transcription terminators within the operon, each of which is preceded by another stem-loop structure, the antiterminator, whose formation would prevent formation of the terminator stem-loop. These are located in the leader, the pyrR-pyrP intercistronic region, and the pyrP-pyrB intercistronic region. Northern (RNA) blot analysis has identified transcripts of lengths which coincide with termination at these proposed attenuation sites and whose relative abundances vary in the expected pyrimidine-dependent manner. Each antiterminator contains a 50-base conserved sequence in its promoter-proximal half. Various transcriptional fusions of the pyr promoter and surrounding sequences to promoterless reporter genes support an attenuation mechanism whereby when pyrimidines are abundant, the PyrR protein binds to the conserved sequence in the pyr mRNA and disrupts the antiterminator, permitting terminator hairpin formation and promoting transcription termination. Deletion of pyrR from the chromosome resulted in the constitutive, elevated expression of aspartate transcarbamylase, which is encoded by pyrB, the third gene in the operon. Complementation of an E. coli upp mutant, as well as direct enzymatic assay, has demonstrated that pyrR also confers uracil phosphoribosyltransferase activity. Analysis of pyrR and upp deletion mutants demonstrated that upp, not pyrR, encodes the quantitatively important uracil phosphoribosyltransferase activity. The pyrP gene probably encodes an integral membrane uracil permease.    A 3-kb DNA segment of the Bacillus caldolyticus genome including the 5&apos; end end of the pyr cluster has been cloned and sequenced. The sequence revealed the presence of two open reading frames, pyrR and pyrP, located immediately upstream of the previously sequenced pyrB gene encoding the pyrimidine biosynthesis enzyme aspartate transcarbamoylase. The pyrR and pyrP genes encoded polypeptides with calculated molecular masses of 19.9 and 45.2 kDa, respectively. Expression of these ORFs was confirmed by analysis of plasmid-encoded polypeptides in minicells. Sequence alignment and complementation analyses identified the pyrR gene product as a uracil phosphoribosyltransferase and the pyrP gene product as a membrane-bound uracil permease. By using promoter expression vectors, a 650-bp EcoRI-HincII fragment, including the 5&apos; end of pyrR and its upstream region, was found to contain the pyr operon promoter. The transcriptional start point was located by primer extension at a position 153 bp upstream of the pyrR translation initiation codon, 7 bp 3&apos; of a sequence resembling a sigma A-dependent Bacillus subtilis promoter. This established the following organization of the ten cistrons within the pyr operon: promoter-pyrR-pyrP-pyrB-pyrC-pyrAa-pyrA b-orf2-pyrD-pyrF-pyrE. The nucleotide sequences of the region upstream of pyrR and of the pyrR-pyrP and pyrP-pyrB intercistronic regions indicated that the transcript may form two mutually exclusive secondary structures within each of these regions. One of these structures resembled a rho-independent transcriptional terminator. The possible implication of these structures for pyrimidine regulation of the operon is discussed.    The regulatory region of the Bacillus subtilis glucitol dehydrogenase (gutB) gene was divided into three subregions: a promoter, an upstream positive regulatory region, and a downstream negative regulatory region. Data from primer extension, deletion, and site-directed mutagenesis analyses were consistent with two possible models for the gutB promoter. It is either a sigma A-type promoter with an unusually short spacer region (15 bp) or a special sigma A promoter which requires only the hexameric -10 sequence for its function. Sequence carrying just the promoter region (from -48 to +6) failed to direct transcription in vivo. An upstream regulatory sequence was essential for glucitol induction. When this sequence was inserted in a high-copy-number plasmid, an effect characteristic of titration of a transcriptional activator was seen. Downstream from the promoter, there is an imperfect, AT-rich inverted repeat sequence. Deletion of this element did not lead to constitutive expression of gutB. However, the induced gutB expression level was enhanced three- to fourfold.    During a genetic screen to identify metalloregulated loci in Bacillus subtilis, we isolated a Tn917-lacZ insertion in the second gene of an operon downstream of the flagellin (hag) gene. Sequence analysis indicates that this gene encodes a homolog of the enteric flagellar filament cap protein FliD. The fliD gene is followed by homologs of the fliS and fliT genes. Transcription of the fliD-lacZ fusion is sigma D dependent, with peak expression at the end of logarithmic-phase growth. Like other sigma D-dependent genes, expression of fliD-lacZ is greatly reduced by mutations in genes essential for assembly and function of the basal body and hook complex (class II functions). These results suggest that B. subtilis flagellar genes are organized in a hierarchy of gene expression similar to that found in enteric bacteria with hag and fliD as class III genes. Expression from the fliD operon promoter, but not the hag promoter, is repressed by iron, which suggests that the target of metalloregulation is the promoter rather than the sigma D protein.    The mutant sigA allele of Bacillus subtilis DB1005 was confirmed to be temperature sensitive (ts) and transferable among strains of B. subtilis by chromosomal transformation and gene conversion. This ts sigA allele had a pleiotropic effect on gene expression of DB1005. The induction of certain heat shock proteins in DB1005 was markedly less significant than that observed in the wild-type strain (DB2) under heat stress. In contrast, some proteins required for coping with oxidative stress and glucose starvation were induced abruptly in DB1005 but not in DB2. Heat induction of the groEL gene in vivo at both transcription and translation levels was much lower in DB1005 than in DB2. Besides, the putative sigma A-type promoter from the groESL operon of B. subtilis was able to be transcribed by the reconstituted sigma A RNA polymerase in vitro at both 37 and 49 degrees C. These results strongly suggest that the expression of the groEL gene of B. subtilis under heat stress is regulated at least in part by sigma A at the level of transcription. Our results also showed that DB1005 did not respond too differently from the wild type to ethanol stress, except after a relatively long exposure.    RNA polymerase purified from Bacillus subtilis contains multiple sigma (sigma) factors and an auxiliary subunit known as delta (delta). We have addressed the roles of the delta polypeptide in a model transcription cycle using the promoter and attenuator of the ilv-leu operon. We demonstrate that delta influences both the promoter selection and core recycling phases of the transcription cycle. The delta protein functions together with sigma as an initiation subunit of RNA polymerase. Remarkably, E sigma delta forms predominantly closed complexes at the P(ilv) promoter even at 40 degrees C, whereas E sigma forms open complexes. The presence of delta inhibits transcription at low temperatures, presumably because delta decreases the rate of open complex formation. In contrast, delta has little or no effect on the overall rate of promoter localization and initiation, rate of elongation, or termination efficiency. Despite the inhibitory effect of delta on DNA-melting, we find that delta stimulates the amount of RNA synthesized from the P(ilv) leader region several-fold in multiple cycle reactions due to an increased rate of enzyme recycling. These results highlight the importance of delta in determining RNA yield during in vitro transcription.    The major cold shock protein of Escherichia coli, CspA, produced upon a rapid downshift in growth temperature, is involved in the transcriptional regulation of at least two genes. The protein shares high homology with the nucleic acid-binding domain of the Y-box factors, a family of eukaryotic proteins involved in transcriptional and translational regulation. The crystal structure of CspA has been determined at 2-A resolution and refined to R = 0.187. CspA is composed of five antiparallel beta-strands forming a closed five-stranded beta-barrel. The three-dimensional structure of CspA is similar to that of the major cold shock protein of Bacillus subtilis, CspB, which has recently been determined at 2.45-A resolution. However, in contrast to CspB, no dimer is formed in the crystal. The surface of CspA is characteristic for a protein interacting with single-stranded nucleic acids. Due to the high homology of the bacterial cold shock proteins with the Y-box factors, E. coli CspA and B. subtilis CspB define a structural framework for the common cold shock domain.    In vitro mutagenesis was performed to identify the DNA packaging domain of the 120-base pRNA essential and specific for DNA encapsidation by bacteriophage phi 29 of Bacillus subtilis. All deletions and mutations targeted the 5&apos; and 3&apos; ends of the pRNA. DNA templates of a control or mutant pRNAs used for in vitro transcription with T7 RNA polymerase were generated by PCR. Fourteen mutant pRNA molecules were synthesized from DNA templates either directly after PCR or after cloning the PCR fragments into the pCR II vector. Ten of the mutant pRNA species were inactive in packaging of the phi 29 genome. Mutation of base one at the 5&apos; end did not affect the pRNA packaging activity. Mutation of the first two bases at the 5&apos; end of the pRNA to noncomplementary bases in the predicted RNA secondary structure (U1 C2/A117G116 to G1 G2/A117G116) resulted in a pRNA with no detectable DNA-gp3 packaging activity assayed by either sucrose gradient sedimentation or agarose gel electrophoresis, and 10(5)-fold reduction in activity was found when measured by plaque-forming units with a new highly sensitive assay system. Changing bases 116 and 117 so that they were complementary to the mutated bases, 1 and 2, from the previous mutant (G1 G2/A117G116 to G1 G2/C117C116) generated an RNA molecule with restored DNA packaging ability. Our results show that, although not essential for procapsid binding, both the 5&apos; and 3&apos; ends of the pRNA were proximate and crucial for phi 29 DNA packaging.    The complete (6,449-bp) nucleotide sequence of the first-described natural transposon of Listeria monocytogenes, designated Tn5422, was determined. Tn5422 is a transposon of the Tn3 family delineated by imperfect inverted repeats (IRs) of 40 bp. It contains two genes which confer cadmium resistance (M. Lebrun, A. Audurier, and P. Cossart, J. Bacteriol. 176:3040-3048, 1994) and two open reading frames that encode a transposase (TnpA) and a resolvase (TnpR) of 971 and 184 amino acids, respectively. The cadmium resistance genes and the transposition genes are transcribed in opposite directions and are separated by a putative recombination site (res). The structural elements presumed to be involved in transposition of Tn5422 (IRs, transposase, resolvase, and res) are very similar to those of Tn917, suggesting a common origin. The transposition genes were not induced by cadmium. Analysis of sequences surrounding Tn5422 in nine different plasmids of L. monocytogenes indicated that Tn5422 is a functional transposon, capable of intramolecular replicative transposition, generating deletions. This transposition process is probably the reason for the size diversity of the L. monocytogenes plasmids. Restriction analysis and Southern hybridization revealed the presence of Tn5422 in all the plasmid-mediated cadmium-resistant L. monocytogenes strains tested but not in strains encoding cadmium resistance on the chromosome.    The alternative sigma factor, sigma D, activates the expression of genes required for chemotaxis and motility in Bacillus subtilis, including those encoding flagellin, hook-associated proteins, and the motor proteins. The sigma D protein is encoded in a large operon which also encodes the structural proteins for the basal body and homologs of the enteric CheW, CheY, CheA, and CheB chemotaxis proteins. We report the identification and molecular characterization of a novel chemotaxis gene, cheV. The predicted CheV gene product contains an amino-terminal CheW homologous domain linked to a response regulator domain of the CheY family, suggesting that either or both of these functions are duplicated. Transcription of cheV initiates from a sigma D-dependent promoter element both in vivo and in vitro, and expression of a cheV-lacZ fusion is completely dependent on sigD. Expression is repressed by nonpolar mutations in structural genes for the basal body, fliM or fliP, indicating that cheV belongs to class III in the B. subtilis flagellar hierarchy. The cheV locus is monocistronic and is located at 123 degrees on the B. subtilis genetic map near the previously defined cheX locus. A cheV mutant strain is motile but impaired in chemotaxis on swarm plates. Surprisingly, an insertion in the CheW homologous domain leads to a more severe defect than an insertion in the CheY homologous domain. The presence of dual pathways for chemotactic signal transduction is consistent with the residual signaling observed in previous studies of cheW mutants (D. W. Hanlon, L. Marques-Magana, P. B. Carpenter, M. J. Chamberlin, and G. W. Ordal, J. Biol. Chem. 267:12055-12060, 1992).    The influence of expression control sequences (ECSs; promoters and ribosome-binding sites [RBSs]), transcriptional terminators, and gene orientation on the expression of the Escherichia coli lacZ gene in the gram-negative microorganisms Caulobacter crescentus and E. coli was investigated. A series of broad-host-range expression vectors, based on the RK2 plasmid derivative pRK248, were constructed. The ECSs included the tac promoter, the promoter for the surface layer protein of C. crescentus, and promoters from a number of gram-positive bacteria together with their associated RBSs. In addition, synthetic ECSs were constructed by using different combinations of promoters and RBSs. lacZ expression was found to be dependent on the nature of the promoter and RBS and, to a lesser extent, on the presence of a transcriptional terminator and the orientation of the promoter-lacZ construct in pRK248. The relative efficiencies of the various ECSs in driving lacZ expression differed markedly in C. crescentus and E. coli. In C. crescentus, the ECS ptac1 (tac promoter and consensus RBS for C. crescentus mRNAs) appeared to be the most efficient, producing 12-fold-higher activity than did pSL (promoter for the surface layer protein of C. crescentus and its putative RBS). pSL was not transcribed in E. coli, whereas various promoters from gram-positive microorganisms were transcribed in both C. crescentus and E. coli. A number of ECSs were also used to drive mosquitocidal toxin gene expression in C. crescentus, and a correlation between toxin expression and lacZ expression was observed.    A mutation in Bacillus subtilis, ggr-31, that relieves glucose-glutamine-dependent control of a spoVG-lacZ translational fusion was isolated and was subsequently found to confer a pleiotropic phenotype. Mutants cultured in glucose- and glutamine-rich media exhibited a Crs- (catabolite-resistant sporulation) phenotype; enhanced expression of the spo0H gene, encoding sigma H, as evidenced by immunoblot analysis with anti-sigma H antiserum; and derepression of srfA, an operon involved in surfactin biosynthesis and competence development. In addition, ggr-31 mutants exhibited a significant increase in generation time when they were cultured in minimal glucose medium. The mutant phenotype was restored to the wild type by Campbell integration of a plasmid containing part of the ptsG (encoding the enzyme II/III glucose permease) gene, indicating that the mutation probably resides within ptsG and adversely affects glucose uptake. A deletion mutation within ptsI exhibited a phenotype similar to that of ggr-31.    Cloning and expression in E. coli delta-endotoxin genes cryIAb7, cryIG and, cryIX from Bacillus thuringiensis ssp galleriae has been performed. Restriction mapping and partial sequencing have shown the identity of the 3&apos;-terminal parts of cryIG and cryIX, although their 5&apos;-terminal halves corresponding to the toxin are unique. Sequencing 5&apos;-flanking region of cryIX revealed no translation initiation site, which indicates a nonfunctional state of the gene. The clusterized locating of the cryIG and cryIG genes has been shown. The absence of a promoter-like structure in the 5&apos;-flanking region of cryIG suggests transcription of the gene as a bicistronic mRNA with cryIX. The extremely high homology of the cryIG and cryIX 3&apos;-terminal parts (2 kB long) suggests a recombination act in the gene origin.    The citrulline biosynthetic operon argC-F located at 100 degrees on the Bacillus subtilis chromosome contains seven open reading frames which encode all the enzymes required for the biosynthesis of citrulline. The operon is transcribed as a single transcription unit. The second cistron of the operon is homologous to ArgJ (ornithine acetyltransferase) from Bacillus stearothermophilus and Neisseria gonorrhoeae, suggesting that the acetylation of glutamate and the deacetylation of acetylornithine are carried out by a single enzyme in a cyclical pathway. The argF gene is an orthologue of argF from Pseudomonas aeruginosa and a paralogue of arcB from P. aeruginosa and argF/argI from Escherichia coli.    The genuine alpha-amylase gene from Bacillus licheniformis (amyL) is not expressed in Lactobacillus plantarum, but replacement of the amyL promoter by a strong L. plantarum promoter leads to efficient expression of the gene and secretion of more than 90% of the alpha-amylase into the culture supernatant. A series of L. plantarum genetic cassettes (transcription and translation with or without secretion) were cloned by translation fusion of random DNA fragments to the silent amyL coding frame in the pGIP212 probe vector (P. Hols, A. Baulard, D. Garmyn, B. Delplace, S. Hogan, and J. Delcour, Gene 118:21-30, 1992). Five different cassettes were sequenced and found to harbor genetic signals similar to those of other gram-positive bacteria. The functions of the cloned cassettes and the cassettes isolated previously from Enterococcus faecalis were compared in E. faecalis and L. plantarum, respectively. All signals were well recognized in L. plantarum, but cassettes isolated from L. plantarum led to a low level of amylase production in E. faecalis, suggesting that the L. plantarum signals are more species specific. Six transcriptional or translational fusions were constructed to express the Bacillus subtilis levanase gene (sacC) in L. plantarum. All of these constructions were capable of inducing levanase production and secretion in the culture supernatant, and, furthermore, L. plantarum strains harboring the most efficient fusions could grow in MRS medium containing inulin as the major carbon source. Finally, a two-step chromosomal integration procedure was used to achieve efficient stabilization of an amylase construction without any residual resistance marker or vector sequence.    lytD, the structural gene of the Bacillus subtilis 168 N-acetylglucosaminidase was localized at 310 degrees, next to the tagABC operon. Sequence analysis revealed a monocistronic operon encoding a 95.6 kDa protein endowed with an export signal, the cleavage of which yields the monomer polypeptide (92.8 kDa) of the dimeric active form of the enzyme. Transcription is initiated at a sigma-D (sigma D)-dependent promoter and ends at a terminator common to lytD and the divergently transcribed tagABC operon. In addition, we report the sequence of the adjacent upstream ORF, transcribed in the same direction as lytD, which shows significant homology to phosphomannose isomerase-encoding genes. Cell separation, motility, autolysis, cell wall turnover and growth were not affected in strains devoid of the N-acetylglucosaminidase. A mutant deficient in the two most abundant autolysins, i.e. the LytC amidase and the glucosaminidase, exhibited the phenotype of the amidase-deficient strains, revealing their non-requirement for growth. This conclusion raises two fundamental questions: how does the cell undo the highly cross-linked peptidoglycan so as to be able to grow, and what is the role of the considerable amount of autolysin normally present? Possible answers to these questions are discussed.    A new class II (Tn3-like) transposable element, designated Tn5401, was recovered from a sporulation-deficient variant of Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. morrisoni EG2158 following its insertion into a recombinant plasmid. Sequence analysis of the insert revealed a 4,837-bp transposon with two large open reading frames, in the same orientation, encoding proteins of 36 kDa (306 residues) and 116 kDa (1,005 residues) and 53-bp terminal inverted repeats. The deduced amino acid sequence for the 36-kDa protein shows 24% sequence identity with the TnpI recombinase of the B. thuringiensis transposon Tn4430, a member of the phage integrase family of site-specific recombinases. The deduced amino acid sequence for the 116-kDa protein shows 42% sequence identity with the transposase of Tn3 but only 28% identity with the TnpA transposase of Tn4430. Two small open reading frames of unknown function, designated orf1 (85 residues) and orf2 (74 residues), were also identified. Southern blot analysis indicated that Tn5401, in contrast to Tn4430, is not commonly found among different subspecies of B. thuringiensis and is not typically associated with known insecticidal crystal protein genes. Transposition was studied with B. thuringiensis by using plasmid pEG922, a temperature-sensitive shuttle vector containing Tn5401. Tn5401 transposed to both chromosomal and plasmid target sites but displayed an apparent preference for plasmid sites. Transposition was replicative and resulted in the generation of a 5-bp duplication at the target site. Transcriptional start sites within Tn5401 were mapped by primer extension analysis. Two promoters, designated PL and PR, direct the transcription of orf1-orf2 and tnpI-tnpA, respectively, and are negatively regulated by TnpI. Sequence comparison of the promoter regions of Tn5401 and Tn4430 suggests that the conserved sequence element ATGTCCRCTAAY mediates TnpI binding and cointegrate resolution. The same element is contained within the 53-bp terminal inverted repeats, thus accounting for their unusual lengths and suggesting an additional role for TnpI in regulating Tn5401 transposition.    Soon after the initiation of sporulation, Bacillus subtilis divides asymmetrically to produce sister cells that have very different developmental fates. Recently, it has been proposed that the differential gene expression which begins soon after this division is due to cell-specific activation of the transcription factors sigma F and sigma E in the prespore and the mother cell, respectively. We describe the use of a method for the localization of gene expression in individual sporulating cells that lends strong support to the cell-specific localization of sigma F and sigma E activities. The dependence of sigma E activity on integrity of the gene encoding sigma F has led to the suggestion that activation of sigma F in the prespore leads to a directional signal that triggers activation of sigma E only in the mother cell. Here we show that sigma E actually specifies the fate of the mother cell; in the absence of sigma E, two prespore-like cells are made. The appearance of sigma F activity at both poles of a sigma E-deficient mutant supports the idea that sigma F normally remains latent in the mother cell and that its activation depends on some morphological or physiological feature of the prespore. We present a model for the generation of asymmetry and the establishment of cell fate in B. subtilis.    We have purified and characterized a modified peptide pheromone that accumulates in culture medium as B. subtilis grows to high density. This pheromone is required for the development of genetic competence. When added to cells at low density, the pheromone induces the premature development of competence. The peptide moiety of the pheromone matches nine of the last ten amino acids predicted from a 55 codon open reading frame, comX. comX and comQ, the gene immediately upstream of comX, are required for production of the pheromone. Response to the pheromone requires the comP-comA two-component regulatory system and the oligopeptide permease encoded by spo0K. Spo0K could transport the pheromone into the cell, or function as a receptor, binding the pheromone and sending a transmembrane signal, leading to activation of the ComA transcription factor and induction of competence development.    The sigma F factor establishes cell type-specific gene transcription during sporulation in B. subtilis. sigma F is negatively regulated by SpollAB, which forms complexes with sigma F or SpollAA. ATP and its nonhydrolyzable analogs stimulate the formation of the SpollAB.sigma F complex, whereas ADP stimulates the formation of the SpollAB.SpollAA complex. Which protein SpollAB associates with is determined by the concentrations of the two nucleotides, on which basis we propose a partner-switching model for the regulation of sigma F: [formula: see text] Consistent with this model, SpollAA reverses SpollAB-mediated inhibition of sigma F-directed transcription in a manner that depends on ADP. Cell-specific activation of sigma F could be due to an alteration in adenosine nucleotide levels in one cell of the sporangium.    Sporulation in Bacillus subtilis begins with an asymmetric cell division, producing a smaller prespore and a larger mother cell, both of which contain intact copies of the chromosome. The spoIIIE gene is required for chromosome segregation into the prespore compartment. The effects of the spoIIIE36 mutation on sigma F-dependent transcription are an indirect consequence of the failure of certain genes to enter the cellular compartment in which their transcription factor has become active. SpoIIIE may also be required to prevent sigma F from becoming active in the mother cell.    Expression of sigma D protein and of the hag gene, which is transcribed by the sigma D holoenzyme, is not dependent on spo0, abrB, or sin gene products in Bacillus subtilis. Preliminary results, however, suggest that a signal mediated by the spo0K locus may be responsible for the inhibition of sigma D activity during the stationary phase.    The sigma D factor of Bacillus subtilis is required for the transcription of the flagellin and motility genes as well as for wild-type chemotaxis. Southern blot and sequence analyses demonstrate that the structural gene for sigma D, sigD, is located immediately downstream of a region of DNA originally identified as the chemotaxis (che) locus and now renamed the fla/che region. In fact, sigD appears to be part of a very large operon (&gt; 26 kb) containing genes which encode structural proteins that form the hook-basal body complex as well as regulatory proteins required for chemotaxis. Transposon insertions up to 24 kb upstream of sigD, within several of the genes for the hook-basal body components, give rise to only a moderate decrease in sigD expression. The transposon insertions, however, block sigma D activity as demonstrated by the lack of flagellin expression in strains bearing these insertions. These effects appear to arise from two types of regulation. In cis the transposon insertions appear to introduce a partial block to transcription of sigD from upstream promoter elements; in trans they disrupt genes whose gene products are required for sigma D activity. It appears that sigD transcription is initiated, at least in part, by a promoter many kilobases upstream of its translation start site and that transcription of the flagellin gene by sigma D is dependent on the formation of a functional hook-basal body complex. The possibility that sigD is part of the fla/che operon was further tested by the integration of an insertion plasmid, containing strong transcription terminators, 1.6 and 24 kb upstream of the sigD gene.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    Spore formation in Bacillus subtilis requires the generation of two distinct cell types, each with an active chromosome that becomes committed to a defined program of gene expression. Here we show that a developmental checkpoint couples the initiation of sporulation, and the subsequent formation of these two cell types, to DNA replication early during development. Inhibiting the initiation of chromosomal replication prevents the onset of sporulation and inhibits expression of several genes that are normally induced early during development. This defect in gene expression is due to inhibition of the multi-component phosphorylation pathway needed to activate the developmental transcription factor encoded by spo0A. The target affected by inhibiting the initiation of replication is neither Spo0A nor the major kinase, KinA, needed for production of Spo0A approximately P. Rather, the target appears to be one of the proteins that transfers phosphate from the kinase to the Spo0A transcription factor. The signal that couples activity of the phosphorelay to the initiation of DNA replication is different from the previously described DNA damage signal that inhibits the phosphorelay during SOS induction in a recA-dependent response. Thus, DNA replication as well as DNA damage signals control production of Spo0A approximately P and initiation of sporulation.    We have identified a second homolog of the cell division gene, ftsZ, in the endosymbiont Rhizobium meliloti. The ftsZ2 gene was cloned by screening a genomic lambda library with a probe derived from PCR amplification of a highly conserved domain. It encodes a 36-kDa protein which shares a high level of sequence similarity with the FtsZ proteins of Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis and FtsZ1 (Z1) of R. meliloti but lacks the carboxy-terminal region conserved in other FtsZ proteins. The identity of the ftsZ2 gene product was confirmed both by in vitro transcription-translation in an R. meliloti S-30 extract and by overproduction in R. meliloti cells. As with Z1, the overproduction of FtsZ2 in E. coli inhibited cell division and induced filamentation, although to a lesser extent than with Z1. However, the expression of ftsZ2 in E. coli under certain conditions caused some cells to coil dramatically, a phenotype not observed during Z1 overproduction. Although several Tn3-GUS (glucuronidase) insertions in a plasmid-borne ftsZ2 gene failed to cross into the chromosome, one interruption in the chromosomal ftsZ2 gene was isolated, suggesting that ftsZ2 is nonessential for viability. The two ftsZ genes were genetically mapped to the R. meliloti main chromosome, approximately 100 kb apart.    Early during endospore formation in the bacterium Bacillus subtilis, two distinct cell types are formed. The initiation of this developmental pathway requires several physiological conditions (e.g., nutrient deprivation) and is controlled by the Spo0A transcription factor. We have found that in a culture of sporulating cells, there are two subpopulations, one that has initiated the developmental program and activated the expression of early developmental genes and one in which early developmental gene expression remains uninduced. We measured the expression of developmental (spo) genes in single cells of B. subtilis by using spo-lacZ fusions. Cells containing a spo-lacZ fusion were stained with a dye that fluoresces upon hydrolysis by beta-galactosidase, and the fluorescence in individual cells was measured with a flow cytometer. For Spo+ cells, we found that the proportion of the population expressing early developmental genes correlates well with the fraction of the population that eventually produces spores. In addition, mutations that cause a decrease in the amount of activated (phosphorylated) Spo0A transcription factor cause a decrease in the size of the subpopulation expressing early developmental genes that are directly activated by Spo0A approximately P. Again, the size of the subpopulation correlates well with the fraction of cells that produce spores. These results indicate that a threshold level of activated Spo0A (Spo0A approximately P) or of a component of the phosphorylation pathway must accumulate to induce sporulation gene expression and that most of the cells that are able to induce the expression of early genes that are directly activated by Spo0A approximately P go on to produce mature spores.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    The first enzyme of the Bacillus subtilis histidine-degradative (hut) pathway, histidase, was expressed at higher levels during the onset of the stationary growth phase in nutrient sporulation medium in early-blocked sporulation mutants (spo0A) than in wild-type strains. Histidase expression was also elevated in spo0A mutant cultures compared with wild-type cultures during the logarithmic growth phase in minimal medium containing slowly metabolized carbon sources. Histidase expression was not derepressed in spo0A abrB mutant cultures under these growth conditions, suggesting that the AbrB protein is responsible for the derepression of histidase synthesis seen in spo0A mutant cultures. spo0A mutants contain higher levels of the AbrB protein than do wild-type strains because the Spo0A protein represses AbrB expression. A direct correlation between the levels of abrB transcription and histidase expression was found in spo0A mutant cultures. The hutOCR2 operator, which is required for wild-type regulation of hut expression by catabolite repression, was also required for AbrB-dependent derepression of hut expression in spo0A mutants. Purified AbrB protein bound to the hutOCR2 operator in vitro, suggesting that AbrB protein alters hut expression by competing with the hut catabolite repressor protein for binding to the hutOCR2 site. During the logarithmic growth phase in media containing slowly metabolized carbon sources, the expression of several other enzymes subject to catabolite repression was elevated in spo0A mutants but not in spo0A abrB mutants. This suggests that the AbrB protein acts as a global modulator of catabolite repression during carbon-limited growth.    Expression of the Bacillus subtilis hut operon is subject to regulation by catabolite repression. A set of hut-lacZ transcriptional fusions was constructed and used to identify two cis-acting sites involved in catabolite repression. The hutOCR1 operator site lies immediately downstream of the hut promoter and weakly regulates hut expression in response to catabolite repression. The downstream hutOCR2 operator site lies within the hutP gene, between positions +203 and +216, and is required for wild-type levels of catabolite repression. Both the hutOCR1 and hutOCR2 operators have sequence similarity to the sites which mediate catabolite repression of several other B. subtilis genes. Two mutations which relieve catabolite repression of hut expression were found to alter the nucleotide sequence of the hutOCR2 operator. Catabolite repression of hut expression was partially relieved in strains containing the ccpA mutation but not in strains containing either the pai or hpr mutation.    The activity of sigma B, a secondary sigma factor of Bacillus subtilis, is primarily controlled by an anti-sigma factor protein (RsbW) that binds to sigma B and blocks its ability to form an RNA polymerase holoenzyme (E-sigma B). Inhibition of sigma B by RsbW is counteracted by RsbV, a protein that is essential for the activation of sigma B-dependent transcription. When crude B. subtilis extracts were fractionated by gel filtration chromatography or electrophoresis through nondenaturing polyacrylamide gels, a complex composed of RsbW and RsbV that is distinct from the previously observed RsbW-sigma B complex was detected. In analogous experiments, RsbX, an additional regulator of sigma B-dependent transcription that is thought to act independently of RsbV-RsbW, was not found to associate with any of the other sigB operon products. Two forms of RsbV were visualized when crude cell extracts of B. subtilis were subjected to isoelectric focusing (IEF), with the more negatively charged RsbV species absent from extracts prepared from RsbW- strains. In vitro, RsbV became phosphorylated when incubated with ATP and RsbW but not with ATP alone. The phosphorylated RsbV species comigrated during IEF with the RsbW-dependent form of RsbV found in crude cell extracts. These results suggest that the modified RsbV, present in crude cell extracts, is phosphorylated. When gel filtration fractions containing RsbV-RsbW complexes or RsbV alone were subjected to IEF, only the unmodified form of RsbV was found associated with RsbW. The presumed phosphorylated variant of RsbV was present only in fractions that did not contain RsbW.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    The gene bgaA encoding an alkaline endo-beta-1,3-1,4-glucanase (lichenase) from an alkalophilic Bacillus sp. strain N137, isolated in our laboratory, was cloned and expressed from its own promoter in Escherichia coli. The nucleotide sequence of a 1,416-bp DNA fragment containing bgaA was determined and revealed an open reading frame of 828 nucleotides. The deduced protein sequence consists of 276 amino acids and has a 31-amino-acid putative signal peptide which is functional in E. coli, in which the BgaA protein is located mainly in the periplasmic space. The lichenase activity of BgaA is stable between pH 6 and 12, it shows optimal activity at a temperature between 60 and 70 degrees C, and it retains 65% of its activity after incubation at 70 degrees C for 1 h. This protein is similar to some other lichenases from Bacillus species such as B. amyloliquefaciens, B. brevis, B. licheniformis, B. macerans, B. polymyxa, and B. subtilis. However, it has a lysine-rich region at the carboxy terminus which is not found in any other published lichenase sequence and might be implicated in the unusual biochemical properties of this enzyme. The location of the mRNA 5&apos; end was determined by primer extension and corresponds to nucleotide 235. A typical Bacillus sigma A promoter precedes the transcription start site.    In at least three Bacillus thuringiensis subspecies, multiple protoxin genes are confined to just a few of the many plasmids with two or more on one of &gt; 100 mDa and a particular gene, cryIA(b), on a 40-50 mDa plasmid. The latter is unstable but can be maintained in the population by cell mating. Cells which had lost this plasmid compensated by increasing transcription of the remaining protoxin genes resulting in the formation of inclusions which differed from those in the parental strains in their toxicity profiles for selected insects as well as their solubility. Instability of a particular protoxin-encoding plasmid appears to be a mechanism for rapidly shifting the protoxin gene complement and thus the toxicity profiles of these bacteria.    The development of SPP1 has been studied in several B. subtilis mutants conditionally defective in initiation of DNA replication. Initiation of SPP1 replication is independent of the host DnaA (replisome organizer), DnaB, DnaC and DnaI products, but requires the DnaG (DNA primase) and the DNA gyrase. Furthermore, SPP1 replication is independent of the DnaK (heat shock) protein. The phage-encoded products required for initiation of SPP1 replication have been genetically characterized. Analysis of the nucleotide sequence (3.292 kilobases) of the region where SPP1 initiation replication mutants map, revealed five open reading frames (orf). We have assigned genes 38, 39 and 40 to three of these orfs, which have the successive order gene 38-gene 39-orf39,1-gene 40-orf41. The direction of transcription of the reading frames, the lengths of the mRNAs as well as the transcription start point, upstream of gene 38 (PE2), were identified. Proteins of 29.9, 14.6 and 46.6 kDa were anticipated from translation of gene 38, gene 39 and gene 40, respectively. The purified G38P and G39P have estimated molecular masses of 31 and 15 kDa. G38P and G39P do not share significant identity with primary protein sequences currently available in protein databases, whereas G40P shares substantial homology with a family of DNA primase-associated DNA helicases. G38P binds specifically to two discrete SPP1 DNA restriction fragments (EcoRI-4 and EcoRI-3). The G38P binding site on EcoRI-4 was localized on a 393 bp DNA segment, which lies within the coding sequence of gene 38. The putative binding site on EcoRI-3 was inferred by DNA sequence homology, it maps in a non-coding segment. G39P, which does not bind to DNA, is able to form a complex with G38P. The organization of the SPP1 genes in the gene 38 to gene 40 interval resembles that one found in the replication origin regions of different Escherichia coli double-stranded DNA phages (lambda, phi 80 and P22). We propose that the conserved gene organization is representative of the replication origin region of a primordial phage.    The Bacillus subtilis cysE and cysS genes encoding, respectively, the serine acetyltransferase and the cysteinyl-tRNA synthetase were found downstream from the gltX gene encoding the glutamyl-tRNA synthetase. This gene organization is also conserved in Bacillus stearothermophilus where the cysE and cysS genes show high amino acid identity with those of B. subtilis. In both organisms the coding sequences of cysE and cysS overlap, suggesting a translational coupling. B. subtilis cysE and cysS were expressed in Escherichia coli using the inducible trc promoter; they functionally complement mutants of E. coli affected in those genes. Overproduction of B. subtilis CysRS in E. coli has a toxic effect on cell growth. Disruption of gltX and cysS by Campbell-type insertion is lethal for the cell, indicating that these genes code for an essential and unique function in B. subtilis. S1 mapping analysis shows that the transcription of gltX is under the control of a sigma A promoter located 43 base pairs upstream of the initiation codon. A T-box sequence and a rho-independent terminator known to regulate expression of other aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase genes and of some amino acid biosynthetic operons in Bacillus sp., were found between gltX and cysE. No sigma A promoter was detected upstream of cysE, which is consistent with the lethality of a Campbell-type insertion using a plasmid that interrupts transcription coming from the gltX promoter, and suggests that gltX, cysE, and cysS constitute an operon. This is the first case where genes implicated in the biosynthesis of an amino acid and its cognate aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase are shown to be co-transcribed.    We have reported previously about the cloning of the binase gene in E. coli. In this work, using an original approach named &quot;homolog gene recombination&quot; method (HGR), vectors for binase expression in E. coli have been constructed. Transcription of the binase gene have been directed through either tac-promoter or PR-promoter of bacteriophage lambda under the control of temperature-sensitive CI857 repressor. The last promoter gave the maximum yield of binase, up to 100 mg of protein per litre of heat-induced bacterial culture. The location of the transcription terminator at the 3&apos; terminus of the binase gene raised the expression approximately two times more. A chromatographic method have been developed and applied for the control of binase accumulation in growth medium without measuring the ribonuclease activity.    The spo0E locus of Bacillus subtilis codes for a negative regulator of sporulation that, when overproduced, represses sporulation and, if deleted, results in inappropriate timing of sporulation. The product of this locus, Spo0E, was purified and found to be a protein phosphatase, which specifically dephosphorylated the sporulation transcription factor Spo0A-P, converting it to an inactive form. Spo0E was not significantly active as a phosphatase on other components of the phosphorelay signal-transduction pathway producing Spo0A-P. A mutant Spo0E protein that results in sporulation deficiency was purified and found to be hyperactive as a phosphatase. The Spo0E phosphatase may provide an additional control point for environmental, metabolic, or cell-cycle regulation of phosphate flow in the phosphorelay. These results reinforce the concept that the phosphorelay is subject to a host of positive and negative signals for sporulation that are recognized and interpreted as signal integration circuit that has the role of regulating the cellular level of active phosphorylated Spo0A sporulation transcription factor.    We report the cloning and characterization of a cell division gene, herein designated divIC, from the gram-positive, spore-forming bacterium Bacillus subtilis. This gene was previously identified on the basis of a temperature-sensitive mutation, div-355, that blocks septum formation at restrictive temperatures. We show that the divIC gene is a 125-codon open reading frame that is capable of encoding a protein of 14.7 kDa and that div-355 is a 5-bp duplication near the 3&apos; end of the open reading frame. We also show that divIC is an essential gene by use of an in vitro-constructed null mutation. In confirmation and extension of earlier results, we show that divIC is necessary for both vegetative and sporulation septum formation, and we demonstrate that it is required for the activation of genes expressed under the control of the sporulation transcription factors sigma F and sigma E. The divIC gene is located 1.3 kb upstream of the coding sequence for the sporulation gene spoIIE. Between divIC and spoIIE is a 128-codon open reading frame whose predicted product contains a region of similarity to the RNA-binding domains of polynucleotide phosphorylase and ribosomal protein S1 from Escherichia coli and two putative tRNA genes for methionyl-tRNA and glutamyl-tRNA, the gene order being divIC orf128 tRNA(Met) tRNA(Glu) spoIIE.    The role of the carboxy-terminal amino acids of the bacteriophage SPO1-encoded type II DNA-binding protein, TF1, in DNA binding was analyzed. Chain-terminating mutations truncating the normally 99-amino-acid TF1 at amino acids 96, 97, and 98 were constructed, as were missense mutations substituting cysteine, arginine, and serine for phenylalanine at amino acid 97 and tryptophan for lysine at amino acid 99. The binding of the resulting proteins to a synthetic 44-bp binding site in 5-(hydroxymethyl)uracil DNA, to binding sites in larger SPO1 [5-(hydroxymethyl)uracil-containing] DNA fragments, and to thymine-containing homologous DNA was analyzed by gel retardation and also by DNase I and hydroxy radical footprinting. We conclude that the C tail up to and including phenylalanine at amino acid 97 is essential for DNA binding and that the two C-terminal amino acids, 98 and 99, are involved in protein-protein interactions between TF1 dimers bound to DNA.    The dnaK and groESL operons of Bacillus subtilis are preceded by a potential sigma 43 promoter sequence (recognized by the vegetative sigma factor) and by an inverted repeat (IR) consisting of 9 bp separated by a 9-bp spacer. Since this IR has been found in many bacterial species, we suspected that it might be involved in heat shock regulation. In order to test this hypothesis, three different mutational alterations of three bases were introduced within the IR preceding the dnaK operon. These mutations were crossed into the chromosome of B. subtilis, and expression of the dnaK and of the unlinked groESL operons was studied. The dnaK operon exhibited increased expression at low temperature and a reduction in the stimulation after temperature upshift. Furthermore, these mutations reduced expression of the groESL operon at low temperature by 50% but did not interfere with stimulation after heat shock. These experiments show that the IR acts as a negative cis element of the dnaK operon. This conclusion was strengthened by the observation that the IR reduced expression of two different transcriptional fusions significantly after its insertion between the promoter and the reporter gene. Since this IR has been described in many bacterial species as preceding only genes of the dnaK and groESL operons, both encoding molecular chaperones (39 cases are documented so far), we designated this heat shock element CIRCE (controlling IR of chaperone expression). Furthermore, we suggest that this novel mechanism is more widespread among eubacteria than the regulation mechanism described for Escherichia coli and has a more ancient origin.    Bacillus subtilis has an alkaline phosphatase (APase) gene family composed of at least four genes. All members of this gene family are expressed postexponentially, either in response to phosphate starvation or sporulation induction or, in some cases, in response to both. The phoA gene (formerly called phoAIV) and the phoB gene (formerly called phoAIII) products have both been isolated from phosphate-starved cells, and a mutation in either gene decreased the total APase expressed under phosphate starvation conditions. Data presented here show that a phoA phoB double mutant reduced APase production during phosphate starvation by 98%, indicating that these two genes are responsible for most of the APase activity during phosphate-limited growth. The promoter for phoA was cloned and used, with the phoB promoter, to examine phosphate regulation in B. subtilis. phoA-lacZ reporter gene assays showed that the expression of the phoA gene commences as the culture enters stationary phase as a result of limiting phosphate concentrations in the growth medium, thereby mimicking the pattern of total APase expression. Induction persists for approximately 2 h and is then turned off. phoA is transcribed from a single promoter which initiates transcription 19 bp before the translation initiation codon. PhoP and PhoR are members of the two-component signal transduction system believed to regulate gene expression in response to limiting phosphate. The expression of phoA or phoB in response to phosphate starvation was equally dependent on PhoP and PhoR for induction. lacZ-promoter fusions showed that both phoA and phoB were hyperinduced, or failed to turn off induction after 2 h, in a spo0A strain of B. subtilis. Mutations in genes which are required for phosphorylation of Spo0A, spo0B and spo0F, also resulted in phoA and phoB hyperinduction, suggesting that phosphorylation of Spo0A is required for the repression of both APases in wild-type strains. The hyperinduction of either APase gene in a spo0A strain was dependent on PhoP and PhoR. Analysis of a phoP-lacZ promoter fusion showed that the phoPR operon is hyperinduced in a spo0A mutant strain, suggesting that Spo0A approximately P represses APases by repressing phoPR transcription. We propose a model for PHO regulation in B. subtilis whereby the phoPR operon is transcribed in response to limiting phosphate concentration, resulting in activation of the PHO regulon transcription, including transcription of phoA and phoB.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)    Bacillus subtilis can use ammonium and various amino acids as sole nitrogen sources. The utilization of arginine or ornithine is abolished in a sigma L-deficient strain of B. subtilis, indicating that one or several genes involved in this pathway are transcribed by a sigma L-RNA polymerase holoenzyme. Three B. subtilis genes, called rocA, rocB, and rocC, which seem to form an operon, were found near the sacTPA locus (P. Glaser, F. Kunst, M. Arnaud, M.-P. Coudart, W. Gonzales, M.-F. Hullo, M. Ionescu, B. Lubochinsky, L. Marcelino, I. Moszer, E. Presecan, M. Santana, E. Schneider, J. Schweizer, A. Vertes, G. Rapport, and A. Danchin, Mol. Microbiol. 10:371-384, 1993). The expression of this putative operon is induced by arginine and is sigma L dependent. Mutants impaired in the transcription of rocA were obtained. One of these mutants was used as recipient to clone and sequence a new regulatory gene, called rocR. This gene encodes a polypeptide of 52 kDa which belongs to the NtrC/NifA family of transcriptional activators. Upstream activating sequences highly similar to those of NtrC in Escherichia coli were also identified upstream from the rocABC genes. A B. subtilis strain containing a rocR null mutation is unable to use arginine as the sole nitrogen source, indicating that RocR is a positive regulator of arginine catabolism. After LevR, RocR is the second example of an activator stimulating sigma 54-dependent promoters in gram-positive bacteria.    The Bacillus subtilis tryptophan (trpEDCFBA) operon is regulated by transcription attenuation. Transcription is controlled by two alternative RNA secondary structures, which form in the leader transcript. In the presence of L-tryptophan, a transcription terminator forms and the operon is not expressed, whereas in the absence of tryptophan, an antiterminator structure forms allowing transcription of the operon. The mechanism of selection between these alternative structures involves a trans-acting RNA-binding regulatory protein. This protein is the product of the mtrB gene and is called TRAP for trp attenuation protein. TRAP has been shown to bind specifically to trp leader RNA, and to cause transcription of the trp operon to terminate in the leader region. The model for regulation suggests that in the presence of tryptophan, TRAP binds to the leader RNA and induces formation of the transcription terminator structure, whereas in the absence of tryptophan, the protein does not bind and the antiterminator is formed.    The cold-shock response of Escherichia coli describes a specific pattern of gene expression in response to abrupt shifts to lower temperatures. This pattern includes the induction of cold-shock proteins, synthesis of proteins involved in transcription and translation, and repression of heat-shock proteins. The identified cold-shock proteins are involved in various cellular functions from supercoiling of DNA to initiation of translation. The major cold-shock protein, CspA, has high sequence similarity with three other E. coli proteins--CspB, CspC, and CspD. Using translational lacZ fusions, cspB was found to be cold-shock inducible at the level of transcription like cspA, while cspC and cspD were not. The Csp proteins, which share sequence similarity with other prokaryotic proteins and with the &apos;cold-shock domain&apos; of eukaryotic Y-box proteins, may have a function in activating transcription or unwinding or masking RNA molecules. Because the cold-shock response can also be induced by the addition of certain inhibitors of translation, it has been proposed that the state of the ribosome is the physiological sensor for the induction. In addition to E. coli, cold-shock proteins have also been found in other prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms.    Using a DNA fragment of Bacillus subtilis scRNA as a probe, a Bacillus brevis gene encoding the small cytoplasmic RNA was cloned and characterized. B. brevis scRNA consists of 273 nucleotides; the sequence has comparatively low homology (approximately 70%) with other Bacillus sequences. Phylogenetic analysis indicated that B. brevis forms a line of descent distinct from other Bacillus species. However, despite the low overall homology, both functional nucleotide sequence and secondary structural features defined among signal recognition particle (SRP) RNA family members were well conserved.    The genes encoding the six pyrimidine biosynthesis enzymes from the thermophile Bacillus caldolyticus were characterized by cloning and complementation in Escherichia coli, and by nucleotide sequence analysis. Nine cistrons are clustered within an 11 kb region of the chromosome, the gene order being: orf1-pyrB-pyrC-pyrAa-pyrAb-orf2-p yrD-pyrF-pyrE. This organization of the cluster is very similar to that of the pyr operon of Bacillus subtilis. Different parts of the B. caldolyticus cluster were cloned in two orientations in the expression shuttle vector pHPS9. Complementation studies in B. subtilis established that expression of the pyr genes was dependent on the vector-borne promoter, suggesting that they are part of an operon, and that the native promoter of the operon had not been cloned. The deduced amino acid sequence of the individual cistrons showed 49 to 78% identity with the corresponding B. subtilis cistrons. Measurements of the aspartate transcarbamylase (pyrB), orotidine monophosphate decarboxylase (pyrF) and orotate phosphoribosyltransferase (pyrE) levels in cells grown under different conditions indicated that expression of the operon is repressed 7-9-fold by addition of uracil to the growth medium. Based on the nucleotide sequence in the intercistronic region between orf1 and pyrB a regulatory mechanism involving transcriptional termination and antitermination is proposed to control expression of the operon.    A cDNA encoding human glutamine phosphoribosylpyrophosphate amidotransferase for step one in de novo purine nucleotide synthesis was cloned, sequenced, and expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells to yield functional enzyme. Enzyme function was dependent upon removal of an 11-amino-acid propeptide. A mutant enzyme having three propeptide amino acid replacements was not processed and was not active. The human genes GPAT, encoding the amidotransferase, and AIRC, encoding a bifunctional enzyme for steps six and seven in the pathway, were cloned and characterized. GPAT and AIRC are closely linked and divergently transcribed from an intergenic region of approximately 625 base pairs. Expression of a luciferase reporter from the GPAT promoter was approximately 3-4-fold higher than from the AIRC promoter. The GPAT gene was mapped to the q12 region of chromosome 4.    The small prohead RNA (pRNA) of the Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage phi 29 is essential for ATP-dependent packaging of viral DNA. The 174-, 124-, and 120-residue forms of pRNA produced in vitro using T7 RNA polymerase were equivalent in prohead binding and DNA packaging activity to pRNAs produced in phi 29-infected cells. pRNA binding to proheads, characterized by the use of Northern hybridization and filter binding assays, was specific, rapid, and irreversible in the presence of 10 mM Mg2+. Proheads produced in phage-infected cells carried 5.8 +/- 2.7 copies of pRNA, and proheads assembled in Escherichia coli in the absence of pRNA bound 6.0 +/- 3.5 copies of pRNA. Footprints of proheads on pRNA generated with the ribonucleases A, T1, and V1 showed that nucleotides 22-84, 5&apos; to 3&apos;, were protected from ribonuclease attack. Enhanced cleavage at nucleotides 37-40 with ribonuclease V1 suggested a conformational change of pRNA upon prohead binding.    Protein-binding DNA-regions inside and in the vicinity of the phenobarbital-inducible P450bm-3 gene from Bacillus megaterium were characterized by gel-retardation technique and foot-printing analysis. Regions with induction-dependent protein binding capacity were shown to be situated in -279bp/-215bp, -215bp/+83bp and +236bp/+425bp fragments. Precise localization of DNA-protein contacts was established by foot-printing analysis for region -215bp/+83bp. The data obtained are discussed in line with previously reported information on the regulatory regions of various phenobarbital-regulated genes.    Sigma factor (sigma) is a dissociable subunit of bacterial RNA polymerase that determines promoter recognition. It has been proposed that a cluster of highly conserved aromatic amino acids in bacterial sigma factors (region 2.3) defines a melting motif that functions in strand-separation during open complex formation. We demonstrate that many alterations in region 2.3 of the Bacillus subtilis sigma A protein specifically impair open complex formation. The region 2.3 mutations can be grouped in three classes: (1) mutations that do not significantly affect promoter recognition or melting; (2) mutations that lead to cold-sensitive transcription of linear templates; and (3) mutations that lead to little activity on linear templates but retain activity at high temperatures on supercoiled templates. RNA polymerase holoenzymes containing sigma factor melting mutants (classes 2 and 3) form predominantly closed complexes at 40 degrees C and are defective for RNA synthesis when initiation is rate-limiting. The melting defect of these mutant sigma factors is suppressed by template supercoiling, but further enhanced by inclusion of the auxiliary RNA polymerase subunit delta. Consequently, in the presence of the delta polypeptide, the mutant holoenzymes display cold-sensitive transcription on supercoiled templates: conditions which mimic the in vivo situation. A subset of these mutations also affects promoter selectivity, suggesting that region 2.3 may participate in both -10 recognition and DNA melting.    The Bacillus subtilis spoIVCA gene encodes a site-specific recombinase which creates a sigK gene by DNA rearrangement. We have determined the transcription initiation point of the spoIVCA gene and found that (i) the spoIVCA promoter contains sequences which are similar to -10 and -35 regions of promoters recognized by sigma E and (ii) mutation of spoIIGB, which encodes pro-sigma E, blocked the expression of spoIVCA.    The pag gene of Bacillus anthracis, located on plasmid pXO1 (185 kb), encodes protective antigen, a component of the anthrax lethal and edema toxins. Synthesis of protective antigen is enhanced during growth of the organism with elevated levels of CO2. The CO2 effect is at the level of transcription, and pXO1-encoded regulatory factors have been implicated in control of pag expression. We used a Tn917-LTV3 insertion mutant of B. anthracis in which the wild-type pag gene on pXO1 was replaced with a pag-lacZ transcriptional fusion to monitor pag promoter activity. Expression of the pag-lacZ fusion is induced five- to eightfold during growth in 5% CO2 compared with growth in air. Growth in 20% CO2 increases transcription up to 19-fold. By monitoring pag-lacZ expression in atmospheres with different O2 and CO2 concentrations, we demonstrated definitively that the CO2 effect is specific and not simply a result of increased anaerobiosis. The results of 5&apos; end mapping of pag transcripts indicate multiple sites of transcript initiation. We have determined two major apparent start sites, designated P1 and P2, located at positions -58 and -26 relative to the translation initiation codon, respectively. Analysis of total RNA from late-log-phase cells shows comparable initiation from P1 and P2 in wild-type strains grown in aerobic conditions. However, initiation from P1 is increased approximately 10-fold in cultures grown with an elevated level (5%) of CO2. We have identified a locus on pXO1, more than 13 kb upstream from the pag gene, which enhances pag transcription. When added in trans, this locus increases the level of transcripts with 5&apos; ends mapping to P1 but has no effect on the level of transcripts with 5&apos; ends mapping to P2. The CO2 effect on P1 is observed only in the presence of the activator locus.    The transformation-deficient strain E26, isolated as a pHV60 insertion mutant, was used to isolate comK, a novel transcription unit required for genetic competence in Bacillus subtilis. Mutational analysis and sequence determination showed that comK contained one open reading frame (ORF), which could encode a protein of 192 amino acid residues with a predicted molecular weight of 22,500. An integrated copy of comK not only complemented the competence deficiency of a comK deletion mutant, but also that of strains E26 and FB93. Expression of comK occurred exclusively in glucose-based minimal medium during the transition to stationary growth phase. Furthermore, the expression of late competence genes appeared to be dependent on the gene product of comK, the expression of which in turn depended on the presence of a functional comL (or srfA) transcription unit. These epistatic interactions indicate that comK is a competence locus occupying an intermediate position in the competence signal transduction network. Primer extension analysis showed that comK has one major transcription start site, preceded by a sequence resembling the consensus promoter used by the sigma A form of RNA polymerase.    From a partial Sau3AI library of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) DNA in pIJ916, two hybrid plasmids pGX1 and pGX2 were isolated that complemented S. coelicolor A3(2) or S. lividans arginine auxotrophs. Subcloning DNA from pGX1 in the Escherichia coli expression vector pRK9 containing the Serratia marcescens trp promoter gave rise to one plasmid, pZC2, that complemented E. coli argB, C, E and H auxotrophs, and another, pZC1, that complemented only the first three. The plasmids were markedly unstable in the various complemented hosts, to varying extents; pZC1 was characterized further as providing the stablest host/plasmid combinations. In vitro deletion of part of the vector&apos;s trp promoter did not affect complementation of the argB and C auxotrophs, implying that the S. coelicolor A3(2) arg genes may be expressed from their own promoter. The trp promoter-less plasmids included isolates, such as pZC177, that had suffered extensive further deletion without loss of complementing ability. Extracts of an E. coli argE auxotroph carrying pZC177 showed ornithine acetyltransferase activity, indicating that the complementing gene is of the argJ type. The complementation properties of in vitro deletion derivatives of pZC177 indicated the gene order argC-J-B. Part of argC and the upstream region were sequenced; an ORF was identified whose predicted product showed appreciable homology with the E. coli and Bacillus subtilis ArgC polypeptide. Upstream of this ORF a consensus-type promoter and ribosome binding site could be discerned; overlapping its promoter was a sequence with homology to arginine operators in these two other organisms.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    Expression of the division initiation gene, divIB, of Bacillus subtilis vegetative growth was examined. lacZ fusion studies and transcription start point mapping have established that a sigma A promoter proximal to divIB is utilized in vivo. The -10 region of this promoter, which is located 93 bp upstream of the start codon, has been defined precisely by site-directed mutagenesis that destroys the promoter. Examination of transcripts by Northern (RNA) blotting has shown that there are at least two transcripts for divIB. The established proximal promoter was found to give rise to a very minor transcript which could not be convincingly demonstrated in wild-type cells but which became apparent upon insertion of a plasmid into the chromosome just upstream of this promoter. The major transcript for divIB originated from a site several kb upstream of the gene and is probably the same as the long polycistronic message also traversing the murD-spoVE-murG genes that was identified previously by others (A.D. Henriques, H. de Lencastre, and P.J. Piggot, Biochimie 74:735-748, 1992). Transcription from the proximal promoter alone, in an upstream-deletion mutant strain, provided sufficient DivIB for normal growth and division as well as sporulation.    DtxR is an iron-dependent sequence-specific DNA-binding protein that binds to the tox operator, an inverted-repeat nucleotide sequence located upstream from the diphtheria toxin gene. In this study, two additional iron-regulated promoter/operator sequences (IRP1 and IRP2) that are controlled by DtxR were cloned from the chromosome of Corynebacterium diphtheriae and characterized. Operon fusions to lacZ were used to analyze expression from IRP1 and IRP2 in Escherichia coli. Transcription from both promoters was strongly repressed in high-iron medium in the presence of the cloned dtxR gene; however, transcription in the absence of dtxR was 50- to 100-fold greater, regardless of the iron concentration. Purified DtxR altered the electrophoretic mobility of DNA fragments carrying IRP1 or IRP2, and the nucleotide sequences of the two promoter/operator regions indicated that they are both homologous with the tox operator. DtxR protected an approximately 30-bp region on both IRP1 and IRP2 from DNase I digestion. A 19-bp consensus DtxR-binding site was derived from a comparison of the various DtxR-regulated operator/promoter sequences. Footprinting experiments using hydroxyl radicals and dimethyl sulfate demonstrated that DtxR interacted with these operators in a symmetrical manner, probably as a dimer or multimer. The deduced amino acid sequence of an open reading frame (ORF1) located downstream from IRP1 was homologous with a family of periplasmic proteins involved in iron transport in gram-negative bacteria and with the ferrichrome receptor, FhuD, from Bacillus subtilis. These findings suggest that ORF1 encodes a membrane-associated lipoprotein that may serve as the receptor for a ferric-siderophore complex in C. diphtheriae.    Most of the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase genes identified to date in the Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis have been found to be regulated by readthrough of a transcriptional terminator located in the mRNA leader region, upstream of the start of the coding sequence. All of these leader regions contain a series of conserved structural features, as well as a single codon displayed at a precise position within the structure, which has been shown for tyrS to be responsible for the specificity of the response to limitation for tyrosine. The structural features critical for transcription antitermination in Bacillus aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase genes were found in the B. subtilis ilv-leu biosynthetic operon, the Lactobacillus casei valS gene, the Corynebacterium glutaminicum argS gene, and three amino acid biosynthesis operons in Lactobacillus casei and Lactococcus lactis, suggesting that all of these genes are likely to be regulated by a similar antitermination mechanism. This regulatory system therefore appears to be widespread in Gram-positive bacteria.    The Bacillus subtilis spoVD gene has been cloned and sequenced. It encodes a 71,262 Da protein with extensive sequence similarity to penicillin-binding proteins from various organisms. The context of this gene in the B. subtilis chromosome, immediately upstream of the mur operon, suggests that it is related to the pbpB gene of Escherichia coli, which is involved in the synthesis of septal peptidoglycan during cell division. Expression of spoVD in E. coli leads to the synthesis of a membrane-associated protein of the size expected for SpoVD, which can bind labelled penicillin. However, insertional disruption of the spoVD gene has no effect on vegetative growth or division: a second pbp-like gene immediately upstream of spoVD is probably the functional homologue of E. coli pbpB. spoVD seems instead to have a specialized role in the morphogenesis of the spore cortex, which is a modified form of peptidoglycan. spoVD transcription appears to occur from a promoter recognized by the sigma E form of RNA polymerase. Analysis of the expression of a spoVD&apos;-lacZ reporter gene supports this notion and indicates that a second level of negative regulation is dependent on the SpoIIID protein. SpoVD synthesis probably occurs only in the mother cell since both sigma E and SpoIIID are thought to be specific to this cell type. Such localization of SpoVD synthesis was supported by the results of a genetic test showing that expression of spoVD only in the mother cell is sufficient for spore formation. The results support the proposition that spore cortex formation is determined primarily by the mother cell.    The PIM1 nuclear gene in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae encodes a mitochondrial ATP-dependent protease that exhibits over 30% identity with ATP-dependent protease La from Escherichia coli, Lon from Bacillus brevis, and one from Myxococcus xanthus. In addition, Pim1 is 1133 amino acids long and has a putative mitochondrial import signal in the N-terminal region. Enzymatic comparisons of normal PIM1+ and deficient pim1-delta strains revealed that the ATP-dependent protease is located within the mitochondrial matrix. The pim1-delta strains are unable to utilize nonfermentable substrates as the sole carbon source and are unable to maintain functional mitochondrial DNA, indicating that the Pim1 protease is required for mitochondrial function. PIM1 mRNA is constitutively expressed but is increased after thermal stress, suggesting that Pim1 may play a role in the heat shock response.    The &quot;housekeeping&quot; threonyl-tRNA synthetase gene (thrS) of Bacillus subtilis is shown to be transcribed in vivo and in vitro from a single promoter. In vitro, 85% of all messages transcribed from the thrS promoter are terminated at a strong factor-independent terminator localized upstream of the thrS Shine-Dalgarno sequence, within the 305-nucleotide-long leader region. Overexpression of thrS represses transcriptional and translational thrS-lacZ fusions to a similar extent, suggesting that thrS is autoregulated at the transcriptional level. We show that autogenous control does not act at the level of transcription initiation but involves antitermination of the transcription mechanism. thrZ, the second threonyl-tRNA synthetase gene, is also autogenously regulated. However, the ability of the ThrS synthetase to repress thrS as well as thrZ expression is much greater than that of the ThrZ synthetase.    Activation of the spoIIG promoter at the onset of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis requires the regulatory protein, Spo0A, which binds to two sites in the promoter, sites 1 and 2. Phosphorylation of Spo0A is essential for the initiation of sporulation. Therefore, we examined the role of Spo0A phosphorylation in spoIIG promoter activation. Phosphorylation of Spo0A stimulated transcription from the spoIIG promoter in vitro. In DNAse I footprinting experiments with the spoIIG promoter, we found that phosphorylation of Spo0A increased its affinity for site 2 more than for site 1, which is the site to which nonphosphorylated Spo0A binds most avidly. This result could not be explained by increased cooperativity between Spo0A bound at sites 1 and 2 because the increased affinity for site 2 by phosphorylated Spo0A was also observed with a deletion derivative of the spoIIG promoter containing only site 2. We have located Spo0A-binding sequences in the spoIIG promoter by DMS protection assays and mutational analysis, and found that site 1 contains one higher-affinity binding sequence whereas site 2 contains two weaker-binding sites. Two substitutions in site 2 of the spoIIG promoter that change the sequence to be more like an optimal Spo0A-binding site were found to increase promoter activity. Moreover, phosphorylation of Spo0A was not required in vivo for activation of the spoIIG promoter containing these strong binding sites. The results suggest that the primary role for phosphorylation of Spo0A is to increase its affinity for specific sites rather than to activate an activity of Spo0A that acts on RNA polymerase at promoters.    Random genomic Bacillus subtilis lacZ fusions were screened in order to identify the possible existence of regulons responding to the stimuli generated by partial purine starvation. A leaky pur mutation (purL8) was isolated and used to generate the partial purine starvation conditions in the host strain used for screening. On the basis of their induction during partial purine starvation, seven genomic lacZ fusions were isolated. None of the fusions map in loci previously reported to contain purine-regulated genes. One fusion maps very close to the citB locus and may very well be a citB fusion. The fusions were divided into two types on the basis of their response to complete starvation for either ATP or GTP or both components at the same time. Except for one, type 2 fusions were induced by specific starvation for ATP and by simultaneous starvation for ATP and GTP, but not by specific GTP starvation in a gua strain or by GTP starvation induced by the addition of decoyinine. Type 1 fusions were equally well induced by all three kinds of purine starvation including GTP starvation induced by decoyinine. Further subdivisions of the fusions were obtained on the basis of their responses to the spo0A gene product. A total of five fusions showed that spo0A affected expression. One class was unable to induce lacZ expression in the absence of the spo0A gene product, whereas the other class had increased lacZ expression during partial purine starvation in a spo0A background.    Two DNA elements are excised from the chromosome during Anabaena heterocyst differentiation. We have identified the gene xisF which encodes the site-specific recombinase responsible for the excision of a 55-kb element from within the fdxN gene. The cloned xisF gene is sufficient to cause site-specific rearrangement of an artificial substrate in Escherichia coli. Inactivation of xisF in the Anabaena chromosome prevents excision of the fdxN element and growth in nitrogen-deficient medium but does not alter the development of heterocysts. Forced transcription of xisF in vegetative cells did not result in excision of the fdxN element, suggesting that other factors may be involved in cell-type specificity. The predicted XisF protein shows significant similarity to the Bacillus subtilis SpoIVCA recombinase.    Expression of beta-galactosidase encoded by the nrg-29::Tn917-lacZ insertion increases 4,000-fold during nitrogen-limited growth (M.R. Atkinson and S. H. Fisher, J. Bacteriol. 173:23-27, 1991). The chromosomal DNA adjacent to the nrg-29::Tn917-lacZ insertion was cloned and sequenced. Analysis of the resulting nucleotide sequence revealed that the Tn917-lacZ transposon was inserted into the first gene of a dicistronic operon, nrgAB. The nrgA gene encodes a 43-kDa hydrophobic protein that is likely to be an integral membrane protein. The nrgB gene encodes a 13-kDa protein that has significant sequence similarity with the Escherichia coli glnB-encoded PII protein. Primer extension analysis revealed that the nrgAB operon is transcribed from a single promoter. The nucleotide sequence of this promoter has significant similarity with the -10 region, but not the -35 region, of the consensus sequence for Bacillus subtilis sigma A-dependent promoters.    The complete nucleotide sequence of the plasmid pTX14-3 from Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis has been determined. The circular DNA molecule was 7649 bp and had a G + C content of 35.1%. Twenty-two open reading frames larger than 50 codons were identified. Ten of these open reading frames are suggested to be protein coding regions. The existence of the polypeptides encoded by the mob14-3 and rep14-3 genes were verified by maxi-cells analysis in Escherichia coli. Even though the rep14-3 gene was expressed in E. coli the plasmid pTX14-3 was unable to replicate in this bacterium. The minimal region of the plasmid pTX14-3 required for replication in B. thuringiensis was identified. Potential secondary structures upstream of the rep14-3 gene indicated regulation by antisense RNA and transcription attenuation. Extensive sequence homology with the B. thuringiensis subsp. thuringiensis plasmid pGI2 was found in the last part of the mob14-3 gene, downstream of the rep14-3 gene, and in the region containing the single-strand origin of replication (i.e., the minus origin) of pTX14-3. A sequence of 700 bp containing multiple direct repeats was found in an ORF encoding a glycine and proline rich protein of 35.9 kDa. 1.2 kbp upstream and 0.1 kbp downstream of this ORF was found a large direct repeat of 230 bp (87% identity). The region between this direct repeat was often spontaneously deleted from plasmid derivatives containing the entire pTX14-3.    We have sequenced 6006 bp DNA of a region from the Bacillus subtilis SHgw chromosome known to contain riboflavin biosynthesis genes (rib gene cluster, 210 degrees on the B. subtilis genetic map). Five of the seven open reading frames found within the sequence are shown to represent the genes ribG, ribB, ribA, ribH and ribTD. The calculated molecular masses for the putative translation products are 39,305, 23,481, 44,121, 16,287 and 14,574 daltons respectively. The five rib genes are transcribed as a polycistronic 4277 nucleotide messenger RNA. The steady-state level of the transcript is negatively regulated by riboflavin. A cis-acting element necessary for regulation was mapped by analysis of constitutive mutations within the 5&apos; untranslated region of the operon. The element is at least 48 bp in length and does not bear obvious similarity to well defined prokaryotic regulatory elements. The molecular mechanism of regulation remains unknown, but the data presented argue against regulation by attenuation.    Nisin is a ribosomally synthesized peptide that has broad-spectrum antibacterial activity, including activity against many bacteria that are food-spoilage pathogens. Nisin is produced as a fermentation product of a food-grade bacterium, and the safety and efficacy of nisin as a food preservative have resulted in its widespread use throughout the world, including the U.S. Nisin is a member of the class of antimicrobial substances known as lantibiotics, so called because they contain the unusual amino acid lanthionine. Lantibiotics, in general, have considerable promise as food preservatives, although only nisin has been sufficiently well characterized to be used for this purpose. As the number of known natural lantibiotics has increased and their useful characteristics have been explored, it has become desirable to synthesize structural analogs of nisin and other lantibiotics that do not occur naturally. The fact that lantibiotics are gene-encoded peptides synthesized by transcription and translation allows structural variants to be generated by mutagenesis. This review focuses on the progress that has been made in the construction and biological expression of genetically engineered nisin structural analogs. For example, a host-vector pair has been engineered that permits the construction of mutants of the structural gene for subtilin, which is a naturally occurring structural analog of nisin. The vector is designed in such a way that the mutant gene can be substituted for the natural subtilin gene in the chromosome of Bacillus subtilis, which in turn directs the transcription, translation, posttranslational modifications, and secretion of the mature form of the structural analog. Several structural analogs have been constructed, and their properties have provided insight into some of the structure-function relationships in lantibiotics, as well as their mechanism of antimicrobial action. These advances are assessed together with potential problems in the future development of nisin analogs as valuable new food preservatives.    In a newly discovered mechanism for regulating transcription termination, a cognate uncharged tRNA acts directly to promote transcription readthrough.    In the Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis, the developmental process of spore formation occurs in response to nutrient deprivation and requires the generation of two different cell types with distinct programs of gene expression. Entry into sporulation is regulated primarily by activation (phosphorylation) of the transcription factor encoded by spo0A. The phosphorylation state of Spo0A is controlled by a multi-component phospho-transfer pathway and by at least one phosphatase. Recent experiments indicate that several intracellular conditions that decrease the fidelity of chromosome transmission inhibit production of Spo0A approximately P. These conditions include inhibition of DNA replication, DNA damage, and some alterations in the chromosome partitioning and cell division machinery. Coupling accumulation of a critical level of Spo0A approximately P to these conditions seems to serve as a developmental checkpoint to ensure that cells do not attempt to sporulate unless they are able to provide an intact, undamaged chromosome for each of the two cell types needed for sporulation.    The nucleotide sequence of a region located downstream of the Listeria monocytogenes flagellin gene, flaA, has been determined. DNA sequence analysis revealed the presence of two open reading frames with a potential to encode polypeptides of 13.1 and 68.7 kDa, respectively. The deduced polypeptides show a high degree of identity to the chemotactic proteins, CheY and CheA, respectively, from Bacillus subtilis and Escherichia coli. Moreover, significant features of CheY and CheA are conserved in the L. monocytogenes homologues. The high degree of conservation suggests that the polypeptides are involved in signal transduction controlling chemotaxis in L. monocytogenes and consequently the putative genes are named cheY and cheA. Northern blot and primer extension analysis suggested that cheY and cheA are transcribed as a bicistronic unit and that the transcription is thermoregulated.    Phage phi 29 protein p6 is one of the most abundant viral proteins in phi 29-infected B subtilis cells, constituting about 4% of the total cellular proteins (about 3 x 10(6) copies/cell) at late infection. Electron microscopic studies showed that, in vitro, protein p6 forms heterogeneously-sized complexes all along phi 29 DNA, suggesting that protein p6 may have a role in genome packaging and organization. The low stability of the protein p6-phi 29 DNA complexes observed in vitro could reflect the dynamic nature of these complexes, to allow replication, transcription, and encapsidation of the genome. The protein p6-DNA complex consists of a DNA right-handed superhelix wrapped around a multimeric protein core. The DNA in this complex is strongly distorted and compacted. Protein p6 recognition signals have been mapped near the ends of the linear phi 29 DNA and act as nucleation sites for complex formation. Protein p6 does not recognize a specific sequence, but sequences with specific bendable properties that would favor the formation of the complex. Protein p6 represses transcription from the phi 29 C2 early promoter, and activates initiation of phi 29 DNA replication that occurs from both DNA ends. The formation of nucleoprotein complexes at the origins of replication, as well as the specific positioning of protein p6 with respect to the DNA ends are required for the activation of replication. This suggests that the proteins involved in the initiation step of phi 29 DNA replication, either directly interact with protein p6, or recognize a conformational change at a specific location in the DNA. The mechanism of activation could be the local and transient unpairing of DNA at specific sites, facilitated by the strong distortion of DNA conformation in the nucleoprotein complex.    To identify and analyze genes functioning during reproductive cell formation in higher plants, cDNAs harboring the messages induced in meiotic prophase were isolated and characterized. A cDNA library constructed from microsporocytes in meiotic prophase of Lilium longiflorum was screened with a subtraction probe specific to meiotic prophase. Clones selected were classified into 18 groups by cross hybridization and partial sequencing. Northern blot analysis revealed that the transcripts corresponding to the respective cDNA groups began accumulating at the early stages of meiosis and exhibited clone-specific profiles during meiosis and the spore formation process. The amino acid sequences of the predicted gene products showed similarity with known gene products, e.g. heat shock proteins, serine proteases in Bacillus, and RAD 51 gene product in yeast. Half of the putative gene products had hydrophobic N-terminal regions, suggesting that they may function as signal peptides.    A method is described here that can be used to identify operons whose expression is controlled by any particular regulator protein. This method was used to identify operons whose expression is negatively regulated by Spo0A in Bacillus subtilis. Twenty-eight strains were identified, each of which contains an operon-lacZ transcriptional fusion, negatively regulated, either directly or indirectly, by Spo0A. In one of these strains (CSA8), the lacZ gene is fused to the argC-F operon positioned at 100 degrees on the B. subtilis chromosome. The regulated expression of this operon by Spo0A-P is mediated indirectly through the transition state regulator AbrB and is manifest only during growth on solid medium. In a second strain (CSA15), the lacZ gene is fused to an operon encoding a transport system which displays features characteristic of the ABC group of transporters, and which has a very high level of identity to the ribose transport system from Escherichia coli. Expression of the ribose transport operon is directed by a single SigA-type promoter. Transcription from this promoter is repressed by the phosphorylated form of Spo0A during the late-exponential/transition phase of the growth cycle and this control is not mediated through the transition-state regulator, AbrB.    We report a molecular genetic analysis of the region immediately upstream from the Escherichia coli mutL DNA repair gene at 94.8 min. An open reading frame ending 9 bp upstream from the start of mutL corresponds to a 48 kDa polypeptide detected previously in minicells. The predicted amino acid sequence of this 48 kDa polypeptide shows homology to the major N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanine amidase autolysin of Bacillus subtilis, a known amidase of Bacillus licheniformis, and the product of a Salmonella typhimurium gene that maps near 50 min. Insertions in this upstream gene, which we named amiB, or in mutL did not affect cell shape or viability; however, overexpression of the AmiB polypeptide caused cell lysis, hypersensitivity to osmotic shock and treatment with water, and temporary autolysis by low levels of antibiotics, which are all consistent with AmiB acting as a cell-wall hydrolase. Analysis of chromosomal transcription demonstrated that amiB forms a complex operon with mutL and two additional upstream genes. mutL transcripts also originated from an internal promoter, designated PmutL, located in amiB 312 bp upstream from the translational start of mutL. Together, these results suggest that E. coli contains a second amidase possibly involved in cell-wall hydrolysis, septation, or recycling, and that transcription of this amidase is directly linked to a gene central for DNA repair.    The cryIVB gene of Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis (Bti) codes for a 135-kDa insecticidal crystal protein, which is specifically toxic to dipteran larvae. We have identified a transcription start point (tsp) of cryIVB by a primer extension experiment. The promoter sequence alignment, together with the chronology of appearance of the transcript, suggested that cryIVB is transcribed by RNA polymerase containing sigma 35 (E sigma 35). This was confirmed by investigation of cryIVB transcription in several Bacillus subtilis sporulation mutants. Unlike the lepidopteran-specific crystal protein-encoding genes [cryIA(a) and cryIB], transcription of which is regulated by both sigma 35 and sigma 28, cryIVB transcription was controlled only by the sigma 35-dependent promoter at the midsporulation stage.    The Bacillus subtilis cold shock (CS)-inducible gene, cspB, encoding the nucleic-acid-binding, major CS protein CspB, is located at about 80 degrees on the B. subtilis genetic map. Using this cspB as a probe, the CspB-encoding genes from two thermophilic bacilli were cloned and characterized. The nucleotide (nt) sequences of the B. caldolyticus and B. stearothermophilus cspB coding regions are 78 and 76% identical to the B. subtilis cspB and the deduced amino acid (aa) sequences revealed 84 and 82% identity, respectively. The cspB genes of the mesophilic B. globigii and the some what psychrotrophic B. globisporus, were amplified by PCR using mixed degenerate oligodeoxyribonts based on the 5&apos; and 3&apos; ends of B. subtilis cspB. The nt sequence comparisons of the resulting cloned PCR fragments revealed 98 to 99% identity to cspB of B. subtilis and 97% aa identity to the CspB protein. The high conservation of CspB within the genus Bacillus and the presence of a related nucleic acid-binding domain within several eukaryotic transcription factors implies an important common biological function that seems to be highly conserved from bacteria to man.    The low-copy-number, 9.0-kb pSM19035-derived plasmid pBT233, is stably inherited in Bacillus subtilis. The complete nucleotide (nt) sequence of pBT233 has been determined. Analysis of the nt sequence revealed nine major open reading frames (orfs). The repS, erm1 and erm2 genes have been assigned to three of these orfs, and given the gene order, repS-orf alpha-orf beta-orf gamma-orf delta-orf epsilon-orf zeta-erm2-erm1. The organization of genes of the repS-orf gamma region resembles the organization of genes in the repE-orfI region of pAM beta 1. Messenger RNA species of molecular weights corresponding to repS, orf alpha + orf beta, orf gamma, orf delta and orf epsilon + orf zeta were detected by Northern blotting. Proteins of 23.8, 81.3, 34.4, 10.7 and 32.4 kDa correspond to Orfs beta, gamma, delta, epsilon and zeta, respectively. Bands of radioactive proteins of 25, 81, 34, 10 and 32 kDa were detected using the T7 promoter-expression system. The orf beta and orf gamma encode proteins that share homology to site-specific recombinases and type-I topoisomerases, respectively. The orfs, delta, epsilon and zeta, encode proteins with unknown activity. Deletion of a 1.5-kb segment (nt 2999-4552) with coding capacity for orf beta, orf gamma and orf delta does not seem to affect plasmid maintenance. Removal of a 3.0-kb fragment (nt 4598-7689) with coding capacity for orf epsilon and orf zeta reduced plasmid segregational stability, but deletion of a 5.2-kb DNA segment (nt 2546-7826) abolished it.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    The signal peptidase (SPase) SipS of Bacillus subtilis is responsible for the processing of precursors of secreted proteins. It differs from the SPases of Gram-negative bacteria in structure and specificity. To assay the activity of SipS in vitro, two efficient transcription-translation systems for the synthesis of radio-labelled precursors were developed. The systems were completely derived from B. subtilis. Post-translational in vitro processing of pre-staphylokinase by SipS was demonstrated. SipS activity was stimulated in vitro by several non-ionic detergents, whereas it was not affected by a large variety of proteinase inhibitors. SipS shares the latter property with other SPases.    The alternative transcription factor sigma B of Bacillus subtilis is activated during the stationary growth phase by a regulatory network responsive to stationary-phase signals. On the basis of the results reported here, we propose that sigma B controls a general stress regulon that is induced when cells encounter a variety of growth-limiting conditions. Expression of genes controlled by sigma B, including the ctc gene and the sigB operon that codes for sigma B and its associated regulatory proteins, was dramatically induced in both the exponential and stationary phases by environmental challenges known to elicit a general stress response. After cells were subjected to salt stress, the increased expression of lacZ transcriptional fusions to the ctc and sigB genes was entirely dependent on sigma B, and primer extension experiments confirmed that the sigma B-dependent transcriptional start site was used during salt induction of sigB operon expression. Western blotting (immunoblotting) experiments measuring the levels of sigma B protein indicated that ethanol addition and heat stress also induced sigma B activity during logarithmic growth. Salt and ethanol induction during logarithmic growth required RsbV, the positive regulator of sigma B activity that is normally necessary for activity in stationary-phase cells. However, heat induction of sigma B activity was largely independent of RsbV, indicating that there are two distinct pathways by which these environmental signals are conveyed to the transcriptional apparatus.    Prokaryotic transcription initiation factor sigma is required for sequence-specific promoter recognition by RNA polymerase. Genetic studies have indicated that sigma itself interacts with DNA at the -10 and -35 promoter consensus sequences. Binding of Escherichia coli sigma 70 to DNA in vitro, however, can only be observed for truncated polypeptides lacking the amino-terminal amino acids. We have investigated the role of the amino terminus of E. coli sigma 70 in controlling DNA-binding ability. Deletion analysis indicates that amino acids within amino-terminal region 1.1 of sigma 70 inhibit DNA binding by the carboxy-terminal DNA-binding domains. Furthermore, inhibition of binding by the amino-terminal inhibitory domain of sigma 70 can be observed in trans. Likewise, the amino-terminal extensions of two alternative sigma-factors, E. coli sigma 32 and Bacillus subtilis sigma K, negatively affect the DNA binding activity of their carboxy-terminal domains. We propose that initiation of transcription is subject to modulation as a result of the composition and/or structure of the amino terminus of the sigma-subunit and that the sigma family of proteins belong to a larger class of intramolecularly regulated transcriptional effectors.    The ilv-leu operon of Bacillus subtilis is regulated in part by transcription attenuation. The cis-acting elements required for regulation by leucine lie within a 683-bp fragment of DNA from the region upstream of ilvB, the first gene of the operon. This fragment contains the ilv-leu promoter and 482 bp of the ilv-leu leader region. Spontaneous mutations that lead to increased expression of the operon were shown to lie in an imperfect inverted repeat encoding the terminator stem within the leader region. Mutations within the inverted repeat of the terminator destroyed most of the leucine-mediated repression. The remaining leucine-mediated repression probably resulted from a decrease in transcription initiation. A systematic analysis of other deletions within the ilv-leu leader region identified a 40-bp region required for the derepression that occurred during leucine limitation. This region lies within a potential RNA stem-and-loop structure that is probably required for leucine-dependent control. Deletion analysis also suggested that alternate secondary structures proximal to the terminator are involved in allowing transcription to proceed beyond the terminator. Additional experiments suggested that attenuation of the ilv-leu operon is not dependent on coupling translation to transcription of the leader region. Our data support a model proposed by Grundy and Henkin (F. J. Grundy and T. M. Henkin, Cell 74:475-482, 1993) in which uncharged tRNA acts as a positive regulatory factor to increase gene expression during amino acid limitation.    A 5.4 kb HindIII fragment of Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis was identified using a homologous dnaK probe generated by PCR and cloned in Escherichia coli. Upstream sequences were generated by inverse PCR. The two cloned fragments partially overlapped, and sequencing of 5915 bp revealed the presence of four open reading frames in the order orf1-grpE-dnaK-orf4. orf1 encodes a 39 kDa protein of unknown function which shows considerable sequence homology with the Orf39 and Orfa proteins of Bacillus subtilis and Clostridium acetobutylicum, respectively. The downstream ORFs showed high homology to the grpE and dnaK genes of other prokaryotes. The DnaK protein has a characteristic 24-amino-acid deletion exhibited by all the known DnaK proteins of Gram-positive species. In many bacteria the dnaK and dnaJ genes are found as part of the same operon. The L. lactis dnaK operon is unusual in that the dnaK gene is followed by a putative transcription terminator and a fourth large ORF which shares no homology with the dnaJ genes of other bacteria but has a small degree of homology with various membrane proteins. Vegetative promoter sequences are found upstream of both orf1 and orf4. A 12 bp inverted repeat is found upstream of the putative promoter of orf1 and an 8 bp inverted repeat is found between this promoter and the orf1 initiation codon. These repeats are thought to be involved in regulation of the heat-shock genes. The DnaK homologue is induced approximately 3-fold on heat shock at 42 degrees C.    The spoIIAB gene of Bacillus subtilis encodes an inhibitor of sigma F, a transcription factor that plays a crucial role in the establishment of prespore-specific gene expression during sporulation. The SpoIIAB protein can probably also inhibit a closely related sigma factor sigma G, which determines the later phase of prespore-specific transcription. We have isolated two new missense mutations in the spoIIAB gene. spoIIAB28 behaves like the previously described spoIIAB1 mutation, in that it mainly affects the activity of sigma G. In contrast, the spoIIAB22 mutation seems to be impaired mainly in its ability to inhibit sigma F. All three missense mutations are clustered in the N-terminal coding region of spoIIAB, suggesting that this region of the protein interacts with the sigma factors. The extreme N-terminal part of SpoIIAB may be specifically concerned with the regulation of sigma G activity.    Nucleotide sequencing revealed that gtaB, the structural gene of UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (EC 2.7.7.9), is part of a divergon-like genetic entity. The latter consists of two monocistronic operons gtaB and orfX, transcribed from a 245 bp regulatory region, each encoding an acidic protein with a molecular mass of 33.0 and 42.6 kDa, respectively. gtaB is transcribed from a distal PA promoter, and a proximal PB promoter which is negatively controlled by the Sin protein. Sin-mediated transcriptional attenuation and enhancement of PB and PD, respectively, suggest that these promoters control functions which antagonize each other. Transcription of orfX is mediated by a PA promoter. The regulatory region comprises four ATGAAA hexamers, present as two inverse repeats. Protein GtaB exhibits high homology to analogous prokaryotic enzymes, while OrfX shows 55.4% homology with the product of Escherichia coli o389, which is part of a regulatory unit involved in sugar processing. Mutations gtaB515 and gtaBg100, which define different bacteriophage adsorption patterns, were sequenced. They are transitions leading to substitution of amino acids which occupy conserved positions, and are thus likely to be part of an enzyme active site. The nature of the possible receptors for defective bacteriophages PBSY and PBSZ is discussed.    A soluble acid invertase activity isolated from Helianthus tuberosus (Jerusalem artichoke) shoots and analyzed by immunochromatography using polyclonal yeast antibodies, represents around 5% of the total invertase activity. This invertase isoenzyme was also isolated from dormant tuber parenchyma. In these partially dormant tissues, the specific activity of this isoenzyme is low suggesting a partial inactivation of the invertase molecules. Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of immunopurified fractions yields similar levels of the 58 kDa polypeptide both in shoots and dormant tubers, but with much lower activity of the enzyme in the tubers. A cDNA library was constructed in pUEX 1 from poly (A)+ RNA extracted from Jerusalem artichoke tubers. This library was screened for invertase using (i) a Bacillus subtilis invertase DNA probe and (ii) anti-yeast invertase antibodies. A recombinant clone of approximately 1.8 kb size was selected by these two methods. Using Northern blots, a temporal sequence in the expression of invertase gene was observed during the breaking of dormancy with the main level after 8 weeks of cold treatment at 4 degrees C. A 2.5 kb transcript was detected, translation of which would yield a 97 kDa polypeptide representing the precursor of Jerusalem artichoke invertase.    The two predominant polypeptides of the Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. thompsoni crystal are encoded by the cry40 and cry34 genes. These crystal protein genes are located in an operon. Western analysis (immunoblotting) demonstrated that the operon promoter activity was located in the region upstream of the cry40 gene. The Cry34 protein was expressed only when the upstream promoter region was present. The crystal protein genes are the only cistrons in the operon, and they are expressed during sporulation, with the highest transcript levels detected early in sporulation (1.5 to 3 h after the onset of sporulation). Transcription initiates from two adjacent sites located 84 and 85 bases upstream of the cry40 translational start codon. The B. thuringiensis subsp. thompsoni crystal protein gene operon promoter aligned with other crystal protein gene promoters, which are activated from early to midsporulation and transcribed in vitro by the B. thuringiensis RNA polymerase E sigma 35.    The complete dnaJ gene of Clostridium acetobutylicum was isolated by chromosome walking using the previously cloned 5&apos; end of the gene as a probe. Nucleotide sequencing of a positively reacting 2.2-kb HincII fragment, contained in the recombinant plasmid pKG4, revealed that the reading frame of the dnaJ gene of C. acetobutylicum consists of 1125 bp, encoding a protein of 374 amino acids with a calculated M(r) of 40376 and an isoelectric point of 9.54. The deduced amino acid sequence showed high similarity to the DnaJ proteins of other bacteria (e.g. Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis) as well as of an archaeon (Methanosarcina mazei) and to the corresponding proteins of eukaryotes (Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Homo sapiens). The areas of similarity included a conserved N-terminal domain of about 70 amino acids, a glycine-rich region of about 30 residues, and a central domain containing four repeats of a CXXCXGXG motif, whereas the C-terminal domain was less conserved. Northern (RNA) blot analysis indicated that dnaJ is induced by heat shock and that it is part of the dnaK operon of C. acetobutylicum. The 5&apos; end (901 bp) of another gene (orfB), downstream of dnaJ and not heat-inducible, showed no significant similarity to other sequences available in EMBL and GenBank databases.    We have tested whether breakdown of phosphatidylcholine (PC) initiated by exogenous addition of a PC-specific phospholipase C (PC-PLC) from Bacillus cereus or by endogenous overexpression of PC-PLC induces functional activation of NF-kappa B and increases human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) enhancer activity. PC-PLC-activated hydrolysis of PC was found to induce bona fide p50/p65 NF-kappa B binding activity in three different cell lines of human or murine origin. No significant changes in the turnover of other cellular phospholipids were detected in PC-PLC-treated cells. Induction of NF-kappa B by PC-PLC did not depend on de novo synthesis of proteins or autocrine secretion of either tumor necrosis factor or interleukin 1. In human monocytic and lymphoblastoid T-cell lines, induction of NF-kappa B by PC-PLC resulted in clear induction of luciferase expression vectors placed under the control of synthetic kappa B enhancers or wild type, but not kappa B-mutated, HIV long terminal repeat constructs. HIV replication was increased by PC-PLC in chronically infected monocytes and T lymphocytes. NF-kappa B activation promoted by addition of exogenous PC-PLC correlated with an intense production of diacylglycerol. However, addition of a phosphatidylinositol-specific PLC from B. cereus also induced diacylglycerol but did not activate kappa B enhancer-directed vectors. PC-PLC-induced NF-kappa B activation could not be blocked by a specific inhibitor of phorbol ester-inducible protein kinases C. These results indicate that a cellular transduction pathway, dependent on specific PC breakdown, is functional in T lymphocytes and monocytes and may be used by various transmembrane receptors to activate HIV transcription through NF-kappa B-dependent induction of the HIV enhancer.    Gene expression in the mother-cell compartment of the Bacillus subtilis sporangium is governed in part by the sporulation transcription factor sigma K. The production of sigma K is controlled at three levels: by a chromosomal rearrangement that generates the sigma K-coding sequence (sigK), by compartment-specific transcription of sigK, and by conversion of the inactive pro-protein product of sigK (pro-sigma K) to sigma K. To investigate the function of these multiple levels of regulation, we constructed a set of strains that bypass the chromosomal rearrangement, pro-protein processing, or both levels of control. Here we show that one of the functions of the chromosomal rearrangement and pro-protein processing is to prevent inappropriate production of sigma K under nonsporulation conditions. In the absence of both of these levels of control, a low level of sigma K-directed gene expression is observed during stationary phase after growth in rich medium. The appearance of sigma K under these conditions is probably due to a low level of sigma K-directed transcription from the sigK promoter in a positive feedback loop. We also report the construction of a strain that produces high levels of sigma K during growth. Using this strain, we demonstrate that the production of sigma K during growth is sufficient to induce a cascade of gene expression that closely mimics late events in the mother-cell line of gene expression.    We have cloned the chlamydial operon that encodes the initiation factor IF1, the ribosomal proteins L36, S13, and S11, and the alpha subunit of RNA polymerase. The genes for S11 and alpha are closely linked in Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis, and plant chloroplast genomes, and this arrangement is conserved in Chlamydia spp. The S11 ribosomal protein gene potentially encodes a protein of 125 amino acids with 41 to 42% identity over its entire length to its E. coli and B. subtilis homologs; the gene encoding the alpha subunit specifies a protein of 322 amino acids with 25 to 30% identity over its entire length to its E. coli and B. subtilis homologs. In a T7-based expression system in E. coli, the chlamydial alpha gene directed the synthesis of a 36-kDa protein. Mapping of the chlamydial mRNA transcript by RNase protection studies and by a combination of reverse transcription and the polymerase chain reaction demonstrates that IF1, L36, S13, S11, and alpha are transcribed as a polycistronic transcript.    The gene (ipi) for an intracellular proteinase inhibitor (BsuPI) from Bacillus subtilis was cloned and found to encode a polypeptide consisting of 119 amino acids with no cysteine residues. The deduced amino acid sequence contained the N-terminal amino acid sequence of the inhibitor, which was chemically determined previously, and showed no significant homology to any other proteinase inhibitors. Analysis of the transcription initiation site and mRNA showed that the ipi gene formed an operon with an upstream open reading frame with an unknown function. The transcriptional control of ipi gene expression was demonstrated by Northern (RNA) blot analysis, and the time course of transcriptional enhancement roughly corresponded to the results observed at the protein level. Strains in which the ipi gene was disrupted or in which BsuPI was overexpressed constitutively sporulated normally. Analysis of the time course of production of the intracellular proteinase and proteinase inhibitor in these strains suggested that BsuPI directly regulated the major intracellular proteinase (ISP-1) activity in vivo.    The ski22::Tn917lac insertion mutation in Bacillus subtilis was isolated in a screen for mutations that cause a defect in sporulation but are suppressed by the presence or overexpression of the histidine protein kinase encoded by kinA (spoIIJ). The ski22::Tn917lac insertion mutation was in ald, the gene encoding alanine dehydrogenase. Alanine dehydrogenase catalyzes the deamination of alanine to pyruvate and ammonia and is needed for growth when alanine is the sole carbon or nitrogen source. The sporulation defect caused by null mutations in ald was partly relieved by the addition of pyruvate at a high concentration, indicating that the normal role of alanine dehydrogenase in sporulation might be to generate pyruvate to provide an energy source for sporulation. The spoVN::Tn917 mutation was also found to be an allele of ald. Transcription of ald was induced very early during sporulation and by the addition of exogenous alanine during growth. Expression of ald was normal in all of the regulatory mutants tested, including spo0A, spo0K, comA, sigB, and sigD mutants. The only gene in which mutations affected expression of ald was ald itself. This regulation is probably related to the metabolism of alanine.    Previous evidence suggests that hemolysin BL, which consists of a binding component, B, and two lytic components, L1 and L2, is the enterotoxin responsible for the diarrheal form of gastroenteritis caused by food-borne strains of Bacillus cereus. To prove that hemolysin BL and the enterotoxin are the same requires large amounts of these components free of other B. cereus proteins. For this purpose, we sought to clone the gene encoding the B component and to express it in Escherichia coli. A partial genomic library was constructed and a 29-base, 1,152-fold-degenerate oligonucleotide probe, designed from the N-terminal amino acid sequence of the B component, was used to identify recombinant clones containing the gene. Detection of gene products reactive with a monoclonal antibody specific for the B component and analysis of the nucleotide sequence confirmed that isolated clones, reactive with the oligonucleotide probe, did contain the gene encoding the B component. The protein, expressed in E. coli, apparently from the B. cereus promoter, produces a ring-shaped zone of hemolysis when combined with purified L components from B. cereus, a reaction typical of hemolysin BL. Northern (RNA) blot analysis of B. cereus RNA showed a large (5.1-kb) transcript which hybridized with a 500-bp probe internal to the B-component-coding sequence, suggesting that the hblA gene encoding the B component may be transcribed as part of a polycistronic message, possibly including the structural genes for the two lytic components. Higher levels of expression and disruption of the hblA gene are being pursued to resolve whether hemolysin BL is indeed the enterotoxin.    A novel expression system based on the Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage phi 105 has been developed to permit the high-level synthesis and secretion of beta-lactamase I (BlaI) from Bacillus cereus. Shotgun insertion of a promoterless lacZ gene into the phage genome permitted the identification of a clone producing large amounts of beta-galactosidase (beta Gal), indicating the transcription of the reporter gene from a strong phage promoter. The insertion also blocked lysis of the host cell. Although the insertion in the original prophage was complex, plasmid vectors and prophage derivatives have been developed to facilitate the replacement of lacZ with other genes for expression. The new prophages contain two additional mutations: an ind mutation, which greatly enhances the normally poor transformability of phi 105 lysogens, and a cts mutation, which allows thermo-induction of phage development and protein production. Induction of a derivative prophage containing the blaI gene from B. cereus resulted in the production of up to 500 micrograms of secreted BlaI per ml of culture supernatant.    Regulatory protein p4 from Bacillus subtilis phage phi 29 activates transcription from the viral late promoter, PA3, by stabilizing the binding of RNA polymerase to the DNA as a closed complex. Protein p4-induced DNA bending and direct contacts between p4 and RNA polymerase have been proposed to play a role in P(A3) activation. By site-directed mutagenesis at the carboxyl end of protein p4 we have identified residues that are critical both to interact with RNA polymerase and to activate transcription. Substitution of arginine 120 gives rise to a p4 derivative unable to activate transcription, that can bind to DNA and induce a normal DNA bending, but does not stimulate the binding of RNA polymerase to the promoter and cannot form complexes with RNA polymerase. Modification of the closely located residue leucine 117 had a similar but milder effect. The results obtained suggest that arginine 120 and leucine 117 form part of the activating domain of the protein, and show that direct contacts between protein p4 and RNA polymerase play a critical role in transcription activation. The p4-induced DNA bending is therefore necessary but not sufficient for the activation of the PA3 promoter.    Xanthobacter flavus is able to grow autotrophically with the enzymes of the Calvin cycle for the fixation of CO2, which are specified by the cbbLSXFP gene cluster. Previously, the 5&apos; end of an open reading frame (cbbR), displaying a high sequence similarity to the LysR family of regulatory proteins and transcribed divergently from cbbLSXFP, was identified (W. G. Meijer, A. C. Arnberg, H. G. Enequist, P. Terpstra, M. E. Lidstrom, and L. Dijkhuizen, Mol. Gen. Genet. 225:320-330, 1991). This paper reports the complete nucleotide sequence of cbbR and a functional characterization of the gene. The cbbR gene of X. flavus specifies a 333-amino-acid polypeptide, with a molecular weight of 35,971. Downstream from cbbR, the 3&apos; end of an open reading frame displaying a high similarity to ORF60K from Pseudomonas putida and ORF261 from Bacillus subtilis was identified. ORF60K and ORF261 are located at the replication origin of the bacterial chromosome. Inactivation of cbbR, via the insertion of an antibiotic resistance gene, rendered X. flavus unable to grow autotrophically. This was caused not by an inability to oxidize autotrophic substrates (e.g., formate) but by a complete lack of expression of the cbb genes. The expression of the CbbR protein in Escherichia coli was achieved by placing cbbR behind a strong promoter and optimization of the translational signals of cbbR. CbbR binds specifically to two binding sites in the cbbR-cbbL intergenic region.    Vibrio cholerae may be a particularly effective organism for use in delivering heterologous antigens to stimulate a common mucosal immune response. A live attenuated vaccine strain of V. cholerae was constructed from the ctxA deletion mutant 0395-N1, containing the B subunit of Shiga-like toxin I under the transcriptional control of the iron-regulated irgA promoter. The B subunit of Shiga-like toxin I is identical to the B subunit of Shiga toxin (StxB). irgA encodes the major iron-regulated outer membrane protein of V. cholerae, which is a known virulence factor for this organism. Clones of the structural gene irgA from the classical V. cholerae strain 0395, with the gene for the Shiga-like toxin I B subunit inserted under the control of the irgA promoter, were used to introduce an internal deletion of irgA into the chromosome of 0395-N1 by in vivo marker exchange, using the suicide vector plasmid pCVD442. This plasmid contains the sacB gene from Bacillus subtilis, which allowed positive selection for loss of plasmid sequences on exposure to sucrose. The construction of vaccine strains was confirmed by Southern hybridization studies and outer membrane protein analysis. The expression of StxB in the vaccine strain VAC2 following growth in high- or low-iron conditions was shown to be tightly iron-regulated by Western blot analysis and by quantification of StxB using a sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The production of StxB by VAC2 under low-iron conditions was greater than that of the reference strain Shigella dysenteriae 60R.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    Two starch-degrading enzymes produced by Bacillus acidocaldarius (renamed as Alicyclobacillus acidocaldarius) were identified. According to SDS-PAGE, the apparent molecular masses of the enzymes were 90 and 160 kDa. Eight peptide fragments and the N-terminal end of the 90 kDa polypeptide were sequenced. An oligonucleotide, based on the amino acid sequence of a peptide fragment of the 90 kDa protein, was used to screen a lambda gt10 bank of B. acidocaldarius, and the region encoding the 90 kDa protein was cloned. Unexpectedly, the ORF continued upstream of the N terminus of the 90 kDa protein. The entire ORF was 1301 amino acids (aa) long (calculated molecular mass 140 kDa) and it was preceded by a putative ribosomal binding site and a promoter. Computer analysis showed that the 1301 aa protein was closely related to an alpha-amylase-pullulanase of Clostridium thermohydrosulfuricum. We suggest that the starch-degrading 160 kDa protein of B. acidocaldarius is an alpha-amylase-pullulanase, and the 90 kDa protein is a cleavage product of the 160 kDa protein. Another ORF, apparently in the same transcription unit, was found downstream from the amylase gene. It encoded a protein that was closely related to the maltose-binding protein of Escherichia coli.    The binding and transport of DNA by competent Bacillus subtilis requires the assembly of a specialized apparatus. We present here the characterization of comE, an operon under competence control that is required for both DNA binding to the competent cell surface, and for uptake. comE contains three open reading frames (ORF1-3) read in the forward direction, preceded by a long untranslated leader sequence and an apparent E sigma A promoter. A minor promoter also is responsible for transcription of ORF2 and -3. A transcript containing a single ORF is produced in the reverse direction. The reverse ORF overlaps ORF1 and the untranslated comE leader. The comE transcript is present at a very low level during growth and at an elevated level in stationary-phase cells. Conversely, the reverse transcript is present during exponential growth and disappears during stationary phase. The reverse ORF resembles prokaryotic and eukaryotic pyrroline-5&apos;-carboxylate reductases, while ORF2 is similar to several dCMP deaminases. ORF1 and ORF3 are predicted to be integral membrane proteins. The latter is specifically required for DNA uptake but not for binding.    A 4.0 kb EcoRI fragment of Bacillus subtilis conferring thiostrepton resistance was cloned and characterized. By nucleotide sequencing of the relevant region, six open reading frames were established, which corresponded to a part of spo0H, a ribosomal protein gene (rpmG), an unidentified open reading frame (orfE), a transcription antiterminator gene nusG, and ribosomal protein genes rplK and rplA. The orfE-encoded 59-amino-acid polypeptide had a low, but significant, sequence similarity with the carboxy-terminal region of the Escherichia coli SecE protein. A cold-sensitive secE mutation of E. coli was complemented by the plasmid-borne orfE sequence. Furthermore, the normal processing of a proOmpA protein was observed when the secE cold-sensitive strain carried an orfE plasmid, indicating that orfE is the secE homologue of B. subtilis. The B. subtilis secE has only one transmembrane sequence compared to the three in E. coli.    The genetic organization of the spoVAF-serA area of the Bacillus subtilis chromosome and its putative transcription map have been derived from analysis of the nucleotide sequence. In order to confirm this transcription map as regards size of transcripts and to determine growth conditions for their appearance, we undertook Northern hybridization analysis of total RNA from vegetatively growing and sporulating cells. Twenty-three distinct transcripts were thus identified, 14 of which were predicted from sequence analysis and nine of which were not predicted. Eight of the latter are homologous to open reading frames identified by sequence analysis but were not expected, since no obvious promoter or terminator was found in the sequence. The last unexpected transcript does not correspond to an ORF and might identify a novel gene. Three predicted transcripts were not detected. The transcripts were classified in four groups as (i) constitutive, (ii) regulated by nutritional depletion, (iii) specific for sporulation, and (iv) possibly regulated temporally. These studies demonstrate that systematic Northern analysis of a bacterial chromosome region is a useful complement to sequence analysis.    Three different lambda phage clones with overlapping inserts of Bacillus subtilis DNA, which cover the region from spoIIAA to serA, have been isolated. The nucleotide sequence of their inserts, starting after spoVAF and ending at serA, has been determined. A contiguous sequence of 35,354 bp was established, including previously analysed overlapping adjacent regions. Within the newly determined sequence 31 open reading frames (ORFs) with putative ribosome-binding sites have been found. Nine of them correspond to previously sequenced and characterized genes: spo-VAF, lysA, sipS, ribG, ribB, ribA, ribH, ribTD and dacB. Comparison of the amino acid sequences of the products encoded by the other ORFs to known proteins allowed putative functions to be assigned to seven of these ORFs. Among these are the following: (i) the ppiB gene, encoding a cytoplasmic peptidylprolyl isomerase; (ii) two pairs of signal-transducers, one homologous to phoR-phoP of B. subtilis, encoding regulators of phosphatase biosynthesis, and the second to the fecI-fecR of Escherichia coli, which is responsible for the regulation of the citrate-dependent iron (III) transport system; (iii) aroC and serA genes, involved in the biosynthesis of aromatic amino acids and serine, respectively, the function of which has been confirmed by constructing corresponding mutants with disrupted ORFs. The organization of putative operons has been postulated on the basis of the sequences of their transcription terminators, promoters and regulatory elements.    The Bacillus subtilis ccpA gene has previously been shown to be involved in repression of amyE expression when cells are grown in excess glucose. The region of the B. subtilis chromosome downstream from ccpA was characterized to determine if additional genes involved in carbohydrate metabolism were present. Two open reading frames that exhibited sequence similarity to the Escherichia coli and B. subtilis motA and motB motility genes were found immediately downstream from ccpA; disruption of this region had no effect on growth, sporulation or motility. Two divergent transcriptional units containing the acsA and acuABC genes were also found in this region. The acsA gene encodes acetyl-CoA synthetase, and inactivation of this gene resulted in loss of the ability to utilize acetate as a carbon source for growth or sporulation. Disruption of the acuABC genes resulted in poor growth or sporulation on acetoin or butanediol. The acsA and acuABC promoter sequences were identified by primer extension, and are in close proximity. Two sequences resembling the amyO regulatory target site necessary for glucose repression of amyE were identified in the acsA-acuABC promoter regions.    A chitinase gene (chiA) from Streptomyces lividans was characterized and its nucleotides sequenced. Although the deduced amino acid sequence of chitinase A1 did not show any similarity to those of other Streptomyces chitinases that has been sequenced, the C-terminal part, containing both a putative catalytic domain and type-III-like repeating units, showed a similarity (36%) to that of chitinase D from Bacillus circulans. A site of initiation of transcription was found approximately 51 bp upstream from the GTG initiation codon. The promoter region of the chiA gene was subcloned on a 178-bp fragment into the promoter-probe vector pIJ486, resulting in the chitin stimulated expression of the neomycin resistance gene. One of the deleted subclones, which contained a 114-bp sequence upstream from the translation start codon, retained both chitin stimulated production and glucose repression. Chitin stimulated production was lost in an other deleted mutant containing the 104-bp upstream sequence.    One of two putative sigma A promoters identified previously in the region immediately upstream from the rtp gene (encoding the replication terminator protein) [Smith and Wake, J. Bacteriol. 170 (1988) 4083-4090] has been shown by transcription start point (tsp) mapping to be the functional rtp promoter. In these tsp mapping experiments, it was observed that the level of mRNA from this promoter, Prtp, was increased by a factor of 30 in the absence of the replication terminator protein (RTP), consistent with the autoregulation of rtp at the level of transcription. In vitro transcription from Prtp by sigma A RNA polymerase has been shown to be specifically repressed by RTP. A Prtp-spoVG-lacZ fusion was inserted into the chromosome of a strain in which RTP production was inducible by IPTG. Addition of IPTG to cultures of the new strain lowered beta Gal production by a factor of at least four. It is concluded that rtp is autoregulated in vivo at the level of transcription.    Chronic respiratory infections with mucoid Pseudomonas aeruginosa are the leading cause of high mortality and morbidity in cystic fibrosis (CF). The initially colonizing strains are nonmucoid, but in the CF lung they invariably convert into the mucoid, exopolysaccharide alginate-overproducing form causing further deterioration and poor prognosis. Here we report the molecular basis of conversion to mucoidy. The algU gene is required for expression of the key alginate biosynthetic gene algD and encodes a protein homologous to sigma H, an alternative sigma factor regulating sporulation and other post-exponential-phase processes in Bacillus. The algU gene and the negative regulators mucA and mucB constitute the gene cluster controlling conversion to mucoidy. We demonstrate a critical role of mucA in this process based on (i) the presence of frameshift mutations disrupting the mucA coding region in mucoid cells that were absent in nonmucoid parental strains, (ii) genetic complementation of mucA mutations with the mucA+ gene, (iii) allelic replacements with specific mutant mucA genes causing conversion to mucoidy in previously nonmucoid cells, and (iv) detection of identical and additional mucA mutations in clinical mucoid strains isolated from the lungs of CF patients. These results suggest that the switch from the nonmucoid to mucoid state can be caused by inactivation of mucA, resulting in constitutive expression of alginate biosynthetic genes dependent on algU for transcription and that such mutants may be selected in vivo during chronic infections in CF.    The mechanism(s) used by Mycobacterium tuberculosis to establish disease in the human host are not well understood. The virulent M. tuberculosis H37Rv strain and its avirulent derivative M. tuberculosis H37Ra provide an attractive system for the identification of virulence-specific genes of the tubercle bacillus. Differentially expressed genes in the virulent strain of M. tuberculosis (dev genes) were identified by screening a plasmid gene bank of H37Rv with a cDNA probe that was enriched in dev transcripts by subtraction of RNAs common to H37Ra. Individual dev clones coded for RNA transcripts that were differentially expressed in H37Rv in comparison to H37Ra. In contrast, mRNAs and stable RNAs that were commonly expressed in both the strains were present in equivalent amounts. The identification and cloning of dev genes marks the first step in defining bacterial gene(s) involved in the pathogenesis of M. tuberculosis.    We have cloned two metal-regulated genes (mrgA and mrgC) from Bacillus subtilis by using transposon Tn917-lacZ. Both were isolated as iron-repressible gene fusions, but the metal specificity and sensitivity of gene repression are distinct. Transcription of mrgA-lacZ is induced at the end of logarithmic-phase growth in minimal medium, and this induction is prevented by excess manganese, iron, cobalt, or copper. Limitation for metal ions is sufficient for mrgA-lacZ induction, since resuspension in medium lacking both manganese and iron rapidly induces transcription. Transcription of mrgC-lacZ is also induced by iron deprivation but is not repressed by added manganese or other metal ions. Expression of mrgC-lacZ and a 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid-based siderophore is repressed in parallel by iron, and in both cases, only iron effects repression. We have cloned and sequenced the promoter and regulatory regions of both mrgA and mrgC. Both genes are preceded by a predicted sigma A-dependent promoter element with overlapping sequences similar to the iron box consensus element for recognition by the Escherichia coli ferric uptake regulator protein (Fur). Mutation of the putative iron box for gene mrgC leads to partial derepression in iron-replete medium.    In Bacillus subtilis, the adaptive response to DNA alkylation depends on the ada operon, which consists of the adaA and adaB genes, which encode methylphosphotriester DNA methyltransferase (AdaA protein) and O6-methylguanine DNA methyltransferase (AdaB protein), respectively. A structural gene (alkA) that encodes 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase was found upstream of the ada operon, but in the opposite orientation. This cluster of genes was mapped at about 235 kb from the SfiI recognition site near the origin of replication in the physical map of the B. subtilis chromosome. Disruption of the alkA gene sensitized cells to N-propyl-N&apos;-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine, while its overproduction rendered cells highly resistant to N-propyl-N&apos;-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine, indicating that lethal DNA damage produced by bulky alkylating agents was effectively counteracted by AlkA glycosylase. Transcription of the alkA gene was induced by treating adaA+ cells with methylating agents concurrent with transcription of the ada operon. This was accomplished by using methylated AdaA protein bound to a 30-bp segment in the middle of the 100-bp sequence between the transcriptional start sites of the alkA gene and ada operon. Thus, in this organism, the adaptive response to DNA alkylation is achieved by autologous activation of a divergent regulon composed of the genes for a DNA glycosylase and two species of DNA alkyltransferase.    A fragment of 1,185 bp containing the gene coding for phosphofructokinase (ATP:D-fructose-6-phosphate-1-phosphotransferase; EC 2.7.1.11) in Lactobacillus bulgaricus has been cloned, sequenced, and expressed in Escherichia coli. The amino acid sequence of this enzyme was homologous to those of the ATP-dependent phosphofructokinases from E. coli, Thermus thermophilus, Spiroplasma citri, and Bacillus stearothermophilus, suggesting that these enzymes have closely related structures despite their different regulatory properties. The recombinant protein had the same structural and functional properties as did the original enzyme. The 3&apos; end of the 1,185-bp fragment showed the presence of an open reading frame corresponding to the N-terminal amino acid sequence of the pyruvate kinase from L. bulgaricus. This gene organization, the same as that in S. citri (C. Chevalier, C. Saillard, and J. M. Bove, J. Bacteriol. 172:2693-2703, 1990) and B. stearothermophilus (D. Walker, W. N. Chia, and H. Muirhead, J. Mol. Biol. 228:265-276, 1992; H. Sakai and T. Ohta, Eur. J. Biochem. 311:851-859, 1993) but different from that in E. coli (H. W. Hellinga and P. R. Evans, Eur. J. Biochem. 149:363-373, 1985), indicated that the same transcription unit apparently contained the genes for phosphofructokinase and pyruvate kinase, the two key enzymes of glycolysis. The possibility that these genes could be transcribed at the same time suggested that in L. bulgaricus, the coordinated regulation of phosphofructokinase and pyruvate kinase occurs at the levels of both biosynthesis and enzymatic activity.    The 184-kb Bacillus anthracis plasmid pXO1, which is required for virulence, contains three genes encoding the protein components of anthrax toxin, cya (edema factor gene), lef (lethal factor gene), and pag (protective antigen gene). Expression of the three proteins is induced by bicarbonate or serum. Using a pag-lacZ transcriptional construct to measure pag promoter activity, we cloned in Bacillus subtilis a gene (atxA) whose product acts in trans to stimulate anthrax toxin expression. Deletion analysis located atxA on a 2.0-kb fragment between cya and pag. DNA sequencing identified one open reading frame encoding 476 amino acids with a predicted M(r) of 55,673, in good agreement with the value of 53 kDa obtained by in vitro transcription-translation analysis. The cloned atxA gene complemented previously characterized Tn917 insertion mutants UM23 tp29 and UM23 tp32 (J. M. Hornung and C. B. Thorne, Abstr. 91st Gen. Meet. Am. Soc. Microbiol. 1991, abstr. D-121, p. 98), which are deficient in synthesis of all three toxin proteins. These results demonstrate that the atxA product activates not only transcription of pag but also that of cya and lef. beta-Galactosidase synthesis from the pag-lacZ transcriptional fusion construct introduced into an insertion mutant (UM23 tp62) which does not require bicarbonate for toxin synthesis indicated that additional regulatory genes other than atxA play a role in the induction of anthrax toxin gene expression by bicarbonate.    Spo0A is both a positive and a negative transcriptional regulator which plays a very important role in sporulation initiation in Bacillus subtilis. Its N-terminal amino acid sequence is homologous to that of regulator proteins of the two-component regulatory systems involved in signal transduction in bacteria. Phosphorylation of Spo0A through phosphorelay has been reported by Burbulys et al. (1991). In this study, we found that (i) Spo0A is phosphorylated effectively with phospho-EnvZ* (N-terminal truncated EnvZ), which is a heterologous osmotic sensor protein in Escherichia coli, and (ii) a phosphorylation deficient mutant of Spo0A protein is completely defective in initiating sporulation. These results suggest that Spo0A phosphorylation may be an essential event in signal transduction of sporulation in B. subtilis and the signal transduction mechanism has a common feature in Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.    beta-Glucanase synthesis was temporally activated in Bacillus subtilis at the onset of stationary phase. This regulation was dependent upon a drop in the GTP concentration in response to nutrient limitation. The Spo0A and AbrB proteins were involved in the GTP-dependent temporal activation.    The nucleotides of a gene for the extracellular 87-kDa beta-1,3-glucanase of Bacillus circulans IAM1165 and its flanking regions were sequenced. The sequence showed an open reading frame for 877 amino acids, which corresponds to a precursor of the beta-1,3-glucanase. The coding region of 2631 bp is flanked by putative promoter and transcription terminator sequences. The signal peptide was considered to be consisted of 38 amino acids. The amino acid sequence of the mature enzyme composed of 839 amino acids showed high homology to that of the enzyme from B. circulans WL-12, although these enzymes are different in their sizes. A catalytic domain of the enzyme was estimated central region of the sequence on the basis of comparison of amono acid sequences of beta-1,3- or beta-1,3:1,4-glucanases. Properties of the periplasmic enzyme produced in Escherichia coli carrying the gene were identical with those of the extracellular enzyme produced by B. circulans IAM1165.    A novel consensus sequence (GAAC-N4-GTTC) has been identified within the promoter regions of DNA damage-inducible (din) genes from Bacillus subtilis. This sequence has been proposed to function as an operator site that is required for regulation of the SOS system of B. subtilis. To test this hypothesis, a deletion analysis of the dinA and recA promoter regions was utilized. A single consensus sequence is sufficient and necessary for damage-inducible regulation of the dinA and recA promoters. Deletion of the consensus sequences upstream of these promoters derepressed their expression under uninduced conditions. In addition, this deletion analysis has further defined sequences upstream of the recA promoter that are required for expression of the recA gene in cells that have differentiated to the state of natural competence. Northern (RNA) hybridization and S1 nuclease protection experiments have demonstrated that the damage-inducible and competence-inducible recA-specific transcripts initiate from a single promoter. Mutations within the comA, srfA, and degU loci each completely abolish the competence-inducible expression of the recA gene.    The establishment of compartment-specific transcription in sporulating cells of B. subtilis is governed at the level of the activity of transcription factor sigma F. Genetic experiments have suggested that SpoIIAA and SpoIIAB, the other products of the sigma F operon, are involved in regulating sigma F activity. This activity is inhibited in the predivisional cell but specifically released from inhibition in the prespore about 1.5 hr after sporulation is induced. We now show that purified SpoIIAB inhibits transcription directed by sigma F in vitro. We note that the amino acid sequence of SpoIIAB shows some similarity to a group of bacterial histidine protein kinases, and we find that SpoIIAB is indeed a protein kinase that phosphorylates SpoIIAA on a serine residue. We suggest that this phosphorylation is responsible for the compartment-specific release of sigma F activity, perhaps through the formation of a tight complex between SpoIIAB and phosphorylated SpoIIAA.    By the use of a partial proteolysis method and Western-blot analysis, the conformational properties of Bacillus subtilis sigma A factor in the transcription initiation stage were studied. From a comparison of the trypsin-digestion patterns of free sigma A and of sigma A associated with core enzyme, it was found that the production of 45 kDa sigma A tryptic-derived fragment was enhanced when sigma A was associated with the core enzyme. More importantly, a 40 kDa sigma A tryptic-derived fragment was found exclusively in this associated state. Based on the change of the digestion kinetics when producing the 45 kDa tryptic fragment and the generation of this new 40 kDa tryptic fragment from sigma A, it was apparent that a conformation change of sigma A occurred during the association of sigma A with the core enzyme. Also, similar patterns were found for the sigma A present in the holoenzyme-promoter DNA complex. These findings suggest that no further distinctive conformational change of sigma A occurs at the step of RNA polymerase holoenzyme and promoter DNA complex formation. Trypsin-digestion patterns of sigma A in different RNA polymerase holoenzyme and promoter DNA complexes were also studied. The presence of similar trypsin digestion-patterns of sigma A in those complexes strongly supports the idea that a similar sigma A conformation is used in the recognition of different sigma A-type promoters and the formation of different open complexes.    Most Bacillus tRNA synthetase genes are regulated by a common transcription antitermination mechanism but respond individually to limitation for the cognate amino acid. The mRNA leader regions of these genes exhibit extensive structural conservation, with a single codon specific for the appropriate amino acid at the identical position in each structure. Alteration of this sequence in the tyrS gene from UAC (tyrosine) to UUC (phenylalanine) resulted in loss of induction by tyrosine limitation and a switch to induction by phenylalanine limitation. Insertion of an extra base immediately upstream of the codon did not alter regulation, indicating a nontranslational mechanism. A nonsense codon resulted in an uninducible phenotype that was suppressible in a lysyl-tRNA nonsense suppressor mutant, indicating that tRNA acts as an effector.    By using a DNA fragment of Escherichia coli ffh as a probe, the Bacillus subtilis ffh gene was cloned. The complete nucleotide sequence of the cloned DNA revealed that it contained three open reading frames (ORFs). Their order in the region, given by the gene product, was suggested to be ORF1-Ffh-S16, according to their similarity to the gene products of E. coli, although ORF1 exhibited no significant identity with any other known proteins. The orf1 and ffh genes are organized into an operon. Genetic mapping of the ffh locus showed that the B. subtilis ffh gene is located near the pyr locus on the chromosome. The gene product of B. subtilis ffh shared 53.9 and 32.6% amino acid identity with E. coli Ffh and the canine 54-kDa subunit of signal recognition particle, respectively. Although there was low amino acid identity with the 54-kDa subunit of mammalian signal recognition particle, three GTP-binding motifs in the NH2-terminal half and amphipathic helical cores in the COOH-terminus were conserved. The depletion of ffh in B. subtilis led to growth arrest and drastic morphological changes. Furthermore, the translocation of beta-lactamase and alpha-amylase under the depleted condition was also defective.    The partial nucleotide sequence of a gene encoding a Bacillus subtilis homolog to the Escherichia coli ponA gene, encoding penicillin-binding protein 1A, was previously reported. The remaining part of this gene, termed pbpF, was isolated, and its nucleotide sequence was completed. Deletion of this gene did not alter the profile of B. subtilis penicillin-binding proteins observed after gel electrophoresis and resulted in no observable phenotype. A transcriptional pbpF-lacZ fusion was weakly expressed during vegetative growth. Expression diminished during the first hours of sporulation but was slightly induced in the forespore compartment during late sporulation. This sporulation expression was dependent on spoIIIG, which encodes the forespore-specific transcription factor sigma G. A single transcription start site which was apparently directly dependent on E sigma A was detected in vegetative cells.    The Bacillus subtilis dciA operon encodes a dipeptide transport complex that is induced rapidly as cells enter stationary phase and initiate sporulation. Expression of this operon in growing cells is repressed by glucose, by a mixture of amino acids, and by the AbrB protein. A genetic screen was devised to identify mutations that allow inappropriate expression from the dciA promoter during growth. These mutations resulted in increased dciA transcription during growth in nutrient broth, in minimal amino acids medium, and in minimal glucose medium. Some of the mutations, called dcs (dciA control site), were cloned and shown by sequence analysis to cluster near the start site of dciA transcription. Primer extension and in vitro transcription analysis revealed that the dcs mutations did not create a new promoter. These mutations may therefore disrupt an operator site necessary for the binding of a negative regulator responsive to the nutritional state of the cell. The dcs mutant promoters were still subject to AbrB control, suggesting that the dciA operon is regulated by at least two proteins, AbrB and a nutritionally responsive regulator. The gene(s) for the putative nutritional regulator may be defined by the cod (control of dciA) mutations, which appeared to relieve amino acid and glucose repression of dciA by altering a diffusible factor. An abrB cod double mutant exhibited high-level expression of dciA during exponential growth phase.    We report the cloning and characterization of an unusually small gene called spoVM whose product is required for normal formation of the cortex and coat during sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. The spoVM gene is adjacent to, and in convergent orientation with, the B. subtilis homologue to the Escherichia coli gene for ribosomal protein L28. The spoVM open reading frame is only 26 codons in length and is capable of encoding a polypeptide of 3 kDa. The short length of spoVM was verified by means of complementation experiments with wild-type and deletion-mutated copies of the open reading frame and by engineering the synthesis of the spoVM gene product in E. coli. Transcription of spoVM was induced during the second hour of sporulation (approximately stage II) by the appearance of the sporulation RNA polymerase sigma factor, sigma E. Efficient transcription of spoVM additionally required the action of the sporulation DNA-binding protein SpoIIID. Because spoVM was not strongly required for the transcription of several genes expressed at late times in development, its protein product is likely to play a morphogenetic rather than a regulatory role in sporulation.    The spoIIG operon of Bacillus subtilis codes for a sporulation-specific sigma factor, sigma E. In vivo expression of the spoIIG promoter is activated shortly after the onset of sporulation and is dependent on kinA, spo0F, spo0B and spo0A genes. The products of these genes have been shown to participate in a phosphorelay reaction in vitro, culminating in phosphorylation of the transcription factor, Spo0A. The effect of Spo0A phosphorylation on in vitro transcription from the spoIIG promoter was determined. Aliquots from phosphorelay reactions enhanced spoIIG promoter activity 10-fold in transcription assays and stimulation of transcription was dependent on Spo0A phosphorylation. Our results provide biochemical evidence that Spo0A and the phosphorelay form a signal transduction pathway which activates spoII gene expression in development.    Bacillus anthracis produces a gamma-linked poly-D-glutamic acid capsule that is essential for virulence. A 6.2 kb fragment of B. anthracis DNA (cap), when present in Escherichia coli, produces a capsular polymer that is immunologically identical to that produced by B. anthracis. By immunodiffusion analysis of E. coli strains carrying varying portions of the cap region, we identified a novel gene (dep) responsible for degradation of the capsular polymer of B. anthracis. The simultaneous presence of the cap region and the dep gene caused production of low-molecular-weight, degraded capsular polymer both in E. coli and in B. anthracis, whereas the cap region alone caused production of a high-molecular-weight capsule. The dep gene mapped immediately downstream of the cap region within a 1.8 kb fragment and was transcribed in the same direction. This fragment was sequenced and a 1401 bp open reading frame (ORF) was found that is predicted to encode a peptide with molecular weight of 51,460. By in vitro transcription-translation analysis, this ORF was shown to be the dep gene product. The deduced amino acid sequence of the dep product has sequence similarity to E. coli and mammalian gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase (GGT). However, the Dep protein did not have GGT activity. The Dep protein appears to be an enzyme that catalyses the hydrolysis of the poly-D-glutamic acid capsule. Although the biological functions of the dep gene are unknown, it is possible that low-molecular-weight, diffusible polyglutamates produced through the action of the dep gene may act to inhibit host defence mechanisms.    Dipicolinic acid (DPA) is a small polar molecule that accumulates to high concentrations in bacterial endospores, and is thought to play a role in spore heat resistance, or the maintenance of heat resistance. Previous work has shown that mutations in the spoVF locus of Bacillus subtilis prevent the formation of DPA, and give rise to heat-sensitive spores. Addition of exogenous DPA during spore development led to the restoration of heat resistance. This suggested that the spoVF locus encoded dipicolinic acid synthetase, the enzyme thought to catalyse the single reaction needed to synthesise DPA from dihydroxydipicolinic acid, an intermediate in the lysine biosynthetic pathway. We have now cloned and sequenced the spoVF locus of Bacillus subtilis and show that it comprises two coordinately regulated genes, now designated dpaA and dpaB. Expression of fragments of the dpa operon in Escherichia coli has shown that the two gene products together specify DPA synthetase activity. The promoter of the dpa operon, which lies just upstream of the first gene, has been identified by primer extension analysis. Sequences in this region show strong sequence similarity to several promoters recognized by the sigma K form of RNA polymerase. Transcription from this promoter was detected four hours after the onset of sporulation, at about the same time that sigma K activity is known to appear. Furthermore, transcription was abolished by mutations in a series of genes that are known to be required for the synthesis of active sigma K. These results are in accordance with previous work indicating that DPA synthetase activity was present only during the late stages of sporulation and specifically in the mother cell compartment. Transcription was enhanced by a gerE mutation, indicating that, like the previously described cotA gene, spoVF is negatively regulated by GerE. The mother-cell-specific synthesis of an enzyme responsible for a compound that accumulates to high concentrations in the prespore raises interesting questions about intercellular transport mechanisms.    The left end of the genome of Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage SPP1 is represented by EcoRI DNA fragments 12 and 1 (EcoRI-12 and EcoRI-1). A number of different deletions were identified in EcoRI-1. A detailed physical and genetic map of EcoRI-1 from wild-type (wt) phage and SPP1 deletion mutants was constructed. Genes encoding essential products involved in late and early stages of phage DNA metabolism were mapped at the left and right ends of the 8.5-kb EcoRI-1, respectively. Deletions fell within the internal 5157-bp DNA segment of EcoRI-1. The nucleotide (nt) sequence of this region and of the endpoints of two deletions, delta X and delta L, were determined. The nt sequence of the junctions in SPP1 delta X and SPP1 delta L showed that, in these deletions, a segment of DNA between short directly repeated sequences of 10 and 13 bp, located 3427 and 4562 bp apart in the wt sequence, had been eliminated. In both cases, the copy of the repeated sequence was retained in the deletion mutant, consistent with the hypothesis that the deletions originated by homologous intramolecular recombination. The corresponding region in wt phage had fifteen presumptive open reading frames (orfs) and the previously identified SPP1 early promoters (PE1). The poor growth phenotype associated with the SPP1 deletion mutants was attributed to premature transcriptional read through from promoter(s) of the early region into late operon brought into close vicinity of the late genes due to the deletion event.    The development of competence in Bacillus subtilis is regulated by growth conditions and several regulatory genes. In complex media competence development is poor, and there is little or no expression of late competence genes. mec mutations permit competence development and late competence gene expression in complex media, and bypass the requirements for many of the competence regulatory genes. In this paper we describe the cloning and characterization of mecA. The mecA gene product acts negatively in the development of competence. Null mutations in mecA allowed expression of a late competence gene comG, under conditions where it is not normally expressed, including in complex media and in cells mutant for several competence regulatory genes. Overexpression of MecA from a multicopy plasmid resulted in inhibition of comG transcription. The DNA sequence of mecA was determined and the predicted gene product showed no significant similarity to any protein in the database. Expression of a mecA-lacZ translational fusion was constitutive during growth and did not vary significantly in the different media tested. The role of mecA in competence development and other stationary phase phenomena is discussed.    The bsgA gene of Myxococcus xanthus plays an essential role in the regulation of early gene expression during fruiting body formation and sporulation. bsgA mutants behave as though unable to initiate a required cell-cell interaction and consequently fail to transcribe normal levels of many developmentally induced genes. We determined the nucleotide sequence of bsgA, which predicts a single gene encoding a 90.4-kDa protein. The deduced BsgA protein shares 45 and 48% amino acid identity with the lon genes of Escherichia coli and Bacillus brevis, respectively. The cloned bsgA gene was expressed in E. coli, and the BsgA protein was partially purified and found, like its E. coli homolog, to be an ATP-dependent protease. Thus, the basis for the phenotype of bsgA mutants is likely to be a defect in intracellular proteolysis.    The gene encoding the valine (branched-chain amino acid) dehydrogenase (Vdh) from Streptomyces coelicolor has been characterized as follows. The vdh gene was identified by hybridization to a specific oligodeoxynucleotide that was synthesized on the basis of the N-terminal amino acid sequence of purified Vdh. Nucleotide sequence analysis predicts that the vdh gene contains a 364-amino-acid open reading frame that should produce a 38,305-M(r) protein. The deduced amino acid sequence of the Vdh protein is significantly similar to those of several other amino acid dehydrogenases, especially the leucine and phenylalanine dehydrogenases from Bacillus spp. The vdh gene is apparently transcribed from a single major transcriptional start point, separated by only 8 bp from the 5&apos; end of a divergent transcript and located 63 bp upstream from the vdh translational start point. Mutants with a disrupted vdh gene have no detectable Vdh activity and have lost the ability to grow on valine, leucine, or isoleucine as the sole nitrogen source. This vdh mutation does not significantly affect growth or actinorhodin production in a minimal medium, yet the addition of 0.2% L-valine to the medium provokes approximately 32 and 80% increases in actinorhodin production in vdh+ and vdh strains, respectively.    Expression of the Bacillus subtilis sporulation gene spoVE was examined by runoff transcription assay with an RNA polymerase preparation obtained from vegetative and sporulating cells. Transcripts from tandem promoters (P1 and P2 promoters) located just upstream of the spoVE structure gene were detected. The transcription of spoVE initiated within an hour after the onset of sporulation and coincided with the presence of RNA polymerase associated with a 33-kDa protein. Amino acid sequence analysis of the 33-kDa protein revealed that it is a sigma factor, sigma E. Reconstitution analysis of sigma E purified from the sporulating cell extracts and vegetative core RNA polymerase showed that sigma E recognizes the P2 promoter. SpoVE protein could not be synthesized in the transcription-translation coupled system prepared from vegetative cells (M. Okamoto, S. Fukui, and Y. Kobayashi, Agric. Biol. Chem. 49:1077-1082, 1985). However, addition of sigma E-associated RNA polymerase to the coupled system restored SpoVE protein synthesis. These results indicate that spoVE expression in sporulating cells is controlled essentially by sigma E-associated RNA polymerase.    In vivo expression of the Bacillus subtilis spoVE gene was studied by S1 nuclease mapping and spoVE gene fusion analysis. Transcription of spoVE is induced at about the second hour of sporulation from two closely spaced promoters designated P1 and P2. Examination of the precise transcription initiation site by high-resolution primer extension mapping indicated that the nucleotide sequences of the -10 and -35 regions of both P1 and P2 were similar to those of promoters recognized by E sigma E. Moreover, S1 nuclease mapping and translational spoVE-lacZ fusion studies with various spo mutants suggest that the expression of spoVE P2 requires the spoIIG gene product, sigma E. The sporulation of a wild-type strain was inhibited severely in the presence of a multicopy plasmid, pKBVE, carrying the spoVE promoter, indicating the possible titration of a transcriptional regulatory element(s).    Transcription factor sigma B of Bacillus subtilis controls a large stationary-phase regulon, but in no case has the physiological function of any gene in this regulon been identified. Here we show that transcription of gtaB is partly dependent on sigma B in vivo and that gtaB encodes UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase. The gtaB reading frame was initially identified by a sigma B-dependent Tn917lacZ fusion, csb42. We cloned the region surrounding the csb42 insertion, identified the reading frame containing the transposon, and found that this frame encoded a predicted 292-residue product that shared 45% identical residues with the UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase of Acetobacter xylinum. The identified reading frame appeared to lie in a monocistronic transcriptional unit. Primer extension and promoter activity experiments identified tandem promoters, one sigma B dependent and the other sigma B independent, immediately upstream from the proposed coding region. A sequence resembling a factor-independent terminator closely followed the coding region. By polymerase chain reaction amplification of a B. subtilis genomic library carried in yeast artificial chromosomes, we located the UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase coding region near gtaB, mutations in which confer phage resistance due to decreased glycosylation of cell wall teichoic acids. Restriction mapping showed that the coding region overlapped the known location of gtaB. Sequence analysis of a strain carrying the gtaB290 allele found an alteration that would change the proposed initiation codon from AUG to AUA, and an insertion-deletion mutation in this frame conferred phage resistance indistinguishable from that elicited by the gtaB290 mutation. We conclude that gtaB encodes UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase and is partly controlled by sigma B.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    Transcription factor sigma B of Bacillus subtilis is active during the stationary growth phase, but its physiological role remains unknown. Understanding the function and regulation of genes controlled by sigma B (csb genes) should provide important clues to sigma B function in stationary-phase cells. To this end, we used a genetic approach to identify six new csb genes. This strategy relies on two elements: (i) random transcriptional fusions between the Escherichia coli lacZ gene and genes on the B. subtilis chromosome, generated in vivo with transposon Tn917lacZ, and (ii) a plate transformation technique to introduce a null sigB mutation into the fusion-bearing recipients directly on indicator plates. This strategy allowed the comparison of fusion expression in strains that were isogenic save for the presence or absence of a functional sigma B protein. Beginning with 1,400 active fusions, we identified 11 that were wholly or partly controlled by sigma B. These fusions mapped to six different loci that exhibit substantial contrasts in their patterns of expression in the logarithmic and stationary growth phases, suggesting that they participate in diverse cellular functions. However, for all six loci, the sigma B-dependent component of their expression was manifest largely in the stationary phase. The high frequency of six independent csb loci detected in a random collection of 1,400 fusions screened, the fact that four of the six new loci were defined by a single fusion, and the absence of the previously identified ctc and csbA genes in the present collection strongly suggest that sigma B controls a large stationary-phase regulon.    We have identified a stem-and-loop region between the promoter and open reading frame of the Bacillus subtilis senS gene containing a 9 base sequence (TTTAGATAA) identical to a sequence found in a similar regulatory element of the inducible pC194 cat gene. A high copy number of this pC194 regulatory region repressed the expression of senS, indicating that the stem-and-loop region of the cat gene titrated a positive factor necessary for senS expression. These results suggest that factors with similar binding requirements control senS and cat expression. In addition, senS was found to be autoregulated.    The putative region for the control of late transcription of the Bacillus subtilis phage Nf has been identified by DNA sequence homology with the equivalent region of the evolutionary related phage phi 29. A similar arrangement of early and late promoters has been detected in the two phages, suggesting that viral transcription could be regulated in a similar way at late times of the infection. Transcription of late genes requires the presence of a viral early protein, gpF in phage Nf and p4 in phage phi 29, being the latter known to bind to a DNA region located upstream from the phage phi 29 late promoter. We have identified a DNA region located upstream from the putative late promoter of phage Nf that is probably involved in binding protein gpF. Furthermore, we show that the phage phi 29 protein p4 is able to bind to this region and activate transcription from the phage Nf putative late promoter. Sequence alignment has also revealed the existence of significant internal homology between the two early promoters contained in this region of each phage.    Alkaline phosphatase (APase) is induced as a culture enters stationary phase because of limiting phosphate. The results presented here show that expression of APase is regulated both negatively and positively. PhoP, a homolog of a family of bacterial transcription factors, and PhoR, a homolog of bacterial histidine protein kinases, are required for induction of APases when phosphate becomes limiting. The induction period lasts 2 to 3 h, after which the rate of APase accumulation is decreased. Mutant strains defective in the Spo0A transcription factor failed to decrease APase production. The consequent hyperinduction of APase in a spo0A strain was dependent on phoP and phoR. spo0B and spo0F strains also overexpressed APase, suggesting that phosphorylated Spo0A is required for repression of APase. An abrB mutant allele in the presence of the mutant spo0A allele in these strains did not significantly change the APase hyperinduction phenotype, demonstrating that Spo0A repression of abrB expression is not the mechanism by which Spo0A-P regulates APase expression. Our previous report that spo0A mutants do not express APases is in conflict with the present data. We show here that the previously used mutants and a number of commonly used spo0 strains, all of which have an APase deficiency phenotype, contain a previously unrecognized mutation in phoR.    A thermosensitive sporulation mutant of Bacillus subtilis containing a mutation in the secY gene was isolated and characterized. No asymmetric septum specific to the sporulation was detected by electron microscopy at the nonpermissive temperature, indicating that the block occurred at a very early stage of sporulation. Furthermore, competence development in the mutant cell was affected even at the sporulation-proficient temperature. It is assumed that the SecY protein of B. subtilis has multiple roles both in the regulation of spore formation and in stationary-phase-associated phenomena.    We have investigated the temporal and spatial regulation of spoIIM, a gene of Bacillus subtilis whose product is required for complete septum migration and engulfment of the forespore compartment during sporulation. The spoIIM promoter was found to become active about 2 h after the initiation of sporulation. The effects of mutations on the expression of a spoIIM-lacZ fusion were most consistent with its utilization by sigma-E-associated RNA polymerase (E sigma E). A unique 5&apos; end of the in vivo spoIIM transcript was detected by primer extension analysis and was determined to initiate at the appropriate distance from a sequence conforming very closely to the consensus for genes transcribed by E sigma E. A partially purified preparation of E sigma E produced a transcript in vitro that initiated at the same nucleotide as the primer extension product generated from in vivo RNA. Ectopic induction of sigma E synthesis during growth resulted in the immediate and strong expression of a spoIIM-lacZ fusion, but an identical fusion was completely unresponsive to induced synthesis of either sigma F or sigma G under similar conditions. The results of plasmid integration-excision experiments in which the spoIIM gene was reversibly disrupted by a temperature-sensitive integrational vector suggested that spoIIM expression is required in the forespore compartment, but direct examination of subcellular fractions enriched for mother cell or forespore material indicated that spoIIM expression cannot be confined to the forespore. We conclude that spoIIM is a member of the sigma E regulon and that it may be transcribed exclusively by E sigma E. We discuss the implications of this conclusion for models in which activation of sigma E in the mother cell is proposed to be a part of the mechanism responsible for initiating separate programs of gene activity in the two sporangium compartments.    The mechanism underlying catabolite repression in Bacillus species remains unknown. A recent study of the promoter-independent catabolite repression of the gnt operon implicated a consensus sequence (ATTGAAAG) in catabolite repression in the genus Bacillus. The introduction of base-substitutions into the ATTGAAAG sequence in the chromosomal gnt operon affected catabolite repression of the gnt operon. Deletion analysis indicated that the ATTGAAAG sequence is probably part of a cis sequence necessary for the promoter-independent catabolite repression of the gnt operon. Furthermore, we subjected gnt transcripts synthesized with and without glucose to S1 nuclease and slot blotting analyses. The results indicated that the gnt transcripts decreased in the region (+93 to +203; +1, the transcription initiation nucleotide) only in the presence of glucose. Mechanisms underlying this promoter-independent catabolite repression are discussed.    The transcriptional organization of the Corynebacterium glutamicum gap-pgk-tpi-ppc gene cluster, encoding glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, 3-phosphoglycerate kinase, triosephosphate isomerase, and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase, was investigated by Northern (RNA) blot and primer extension analyses. Four transcripts corresponding to gap, to gap-pgk-tpi, to pgk-tpi, and to pgk-tpi-ppc were identified. The respective transcriptional initiation sites in front of gap and pgk were located, and, from the analysis of DNA sequences upstream of these and of previously determined transcriptional start sites, common structures which may be important for promoter function in C. glutamicum are discussed.    Acetoin is a major extracellular product of Bacillus subtilis grown on glucose and other fermentable carbon sources. The enzymes responsible for the formation of acetoin, acetolactate synthase, and acetolactate decarboxylase are synthesized in detectable amounts only in cells that have reached stationary phase. We have cloned and sequenced the genes encoding these enzymes, alsS and alsD, as well as a gene, alsR, that regulates their expression. alsS and alsD appear to compose a single operon, while alsR is transcribed divergently from the alsSD operon. AlsR shows significant homology to the LysR family of bacterial activator proteins, and when alsR is disrupted the alsSD operon is not expressed. Transcriptional fusions to alsS and alsR revealed that AlsR is required for the transcription of the alsSD operon, which increases during stationary phase. Two mutations that cause increased expression of the alsSD operon have been isolated, cloned, and sequenced. They each change an amino acid in the AlsR protein.    Three species of tRNA(Tyr) have been examined as substrates for the transfer reaction of the tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase (TyrRS) from Bacillus stearothermophilus: Escherichia coli tRNA(Tyr), B. stearothermophilus tRNA(Tyr) expressed in E. coli, and B. stearothermophilus tRNA(Tyr) that has been transcribed in vitro. The binding of the first two substrates to TyrRS may be readily monitored by stopped-flow studies of tryptophan fluorescence to give the rate and equilibrium constants. The in vitro-transcribed tRNA(Tyr), which lacks the modified bases queuosine and 2-(methylthio)-N6-isopentenyladenosine in the anticodon loop, does not cause a significant change in tryptophan fluorescence upon binding. The three tRNA(Tyr) substrates exhibit very similar steady-state kinetics in the charging reaction. Pre-steady-state kinetics of the transfer reaction, monitored by stopped-flow measurements of the change in protein fluorescence on the addition of tRNA(Tyr) to the E.Tyr-AMP complex, show two exponential changes for the modified tRNA(Tyr) substrates. The first is that due to substrate binding. The second has an identical rate to the single change observed for the reaction with the in vitro-transcribed tRNA(Tyr) and to that monitored by quenched-flow measurements on the formation of Tyr-tRNA(Tyr). Hence, the transfer reaction can be observed by stopped-flow. The dissociation constants (KtRNA) of tRNA from the enzyme and rates of tyrosine transfer (k4) show that all three tRNA molecules are kinetically equivalent substrates for TyrRS. The value of k4 is also similar to that found for authentic tRNA(Tyr) from B. stearothermophilus.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    The StyLT1 restriction-modification (R-M) system of Salmonella typhimurium has recently been suggested to belong to the type-III R-M systems [De Backer and Colson, Gene 97 (1991) 103-107]. The nucleotide sequences of StyLT1 mod and res have been determined. Two closely adjacent open reading frames were found 12 bp apart with coding capacities of 651 (Mod) and 982 (Res) amino acids (aa), respectively. The genes, lying in the same direction of transcription in the mod-res order, are transcribed as distinct units. The deduced aa sequences reveal homologies with known type-III enzymes from the Escherichia coli P1 prophage, E. coli P15 plasmid and Bacillus cereus chromosome. In addition, the StyLT1 restriction endonuclease (ENase), like other type-I and type-III ENases, contains sequence motifs characteristic of superfamily-II helicases, which may be involved in DNA unwinding at the cleavage site.    In this study, the varying reactivities of Bacillus subtilis tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase toward prokaryotic, eukaryotic, and halophile tRNAs were employed to define the potential identity elements on tRNA(Trp). On this basis mutagenesis was performed to obtain, through in vivo heterologous expression in Escherichia coli and in vitro transcription with T7 RNA polymerase, mutant B. subtilis tRNA(Trp) for comparison with the wild-type. These comparisons served to establish G73 and the anticodon as major identity elements, and A1-U72, G5-C68, and A9 as minor identity elements. While the tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase from B. subtilis and E. coli require G73 to function, replacement of G73 by A73 favors the enzyme from yeast. This change points to the variation of the identity elements for the same amino acid among different organisms. The similarity in these elements between B. subtilis and E. coli tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase, however, suggests that identity elements on tRNA, like the active centers on enzymes, undergo evolutionary change at slower rates than less essential portions of the macromolecule.    The nucleotide sequence of a 7-kilobase segment of the Bacillus subtilis chromosome containing the entire coding regions for the enzymes catalyzing the first three steps of diaminopimelate synthesis as well as dipicolinate synthase has been determined. This group of functionally related genes, termed the dap operon, were arranged in the order orfY, orfX, asd, dapG, and dapA and were bracketed by potential rho-independent transcription terminators. The asd locus could complement the growth defect of Escherichia coli strains with an asd deletion. Disruption of the dapG locus led to the loss of aspartokinase I, with a phenotype similar to that of the temperature-sensitive dapG mutants described earlier (Roten, C. A. H., Brandt, C., and Karamata, D. (1991) J. Gen. Microbiol. 137, 951-962). The amino acid sequences of the deduced products of the asd, dapG, and dapA loci had high degrees of similarity with those of other aspartate semialdehyde dehydrogenases, aspartokinases, and dihydrodipicolinate synthases, respectively. Disruption of orfX had no effect on growth but caused a sporulation defect, characterized by low sporulation frequencies and heat-sensitive spores, which could be cured by supplementation with dipicolinate, similar to the phenotype of mutants defective in spoVF, the putative structural gene for dipicolinate synthase. Two other open reading frames, upstream of spoVF, encoded the 380 COOH-terminal residues of a protein homologous to mitochondrial processing proteases and an 85-residue polypeptide of unknown function. Transcription initiation sites associated with the orfY-orfX-asd-dapG-dapA gene cluster were mapped by primer extension. The results indicate that during vegetative growth, the three distal genes of the dap operon, asd, dapG, and dapA, are transcribed as a unit and orfY and orfX are not expressed, whereas at stage 5 of sporulation two separate transcripts are produced, one comprising all five genes, the other just the three distal genes of the operon.    Transport processes are used by all organisms to obtain essential nutrients and to expel wastes and other potentially harmful substances from cells. Such processes are important means by which resistance to selected antimicrobial agents in bacteria is achieved. The recently described Staphylococcus aureus norA gene encodes a membrane-associated protein that mediates active efflux of fluoroquinolones from cells. SA-1199B is a fluoroquinolone-resistant strain of S. aureus from which we cloned an allele of norA (norA1199). Similar to that of norA, the protein product of norA1199 preferentially mediates efflux of hydrophilic fluoroquinolones in both S. aureus and an Escherichia coli host, a process driven by the proton motive force. Determination of the nucleotide sequence of norA1199 revealed an encoded 388-amino-acid hydrophobic polypeptide 95% homologous with the norA-encoded protein. Significant homology with other proteins involved in transport processes also exists, but especially with tetracycline efflux proteins and with the Bacillus subtilis Bmr protein that mediates active efflux of structurally unrelated compounds, including fluoroquinolones. In S. aureus, the norA1199-encoded protein also appears to function as a multidrug efflux transporter. Southern hybridization studies indicated that norA1199 (or an allele of it) is a naturally occurring S. aureus gene and that related sequences are present in the S. epidermidis genome. The nucleotide sequence of the wild-type allele of norA1199, cloned from the fluoroquinolone-susceptible parent strain of SA-1199B, did not differ from that of norA1199 throughout the coding region. Northern (RNA) and Southern hybridization studies showed that increased transcription, and not gene amplification, of norA1199 is the basis for fluoroquinolone resistance in SA-1199B.    The bfmB mutant of Bacillus subtilis requires branched short-chain carboxylic acids for growth because the organism is known to be defective in branched-chain alpha-oxo acid dehydrogenase. The DNA in the region of bfmB has now been cloned and sequenced, and the gene has been analyzed. The results show that there are three open reading frames in the area, each of which is preceded by a putative ribosome binding site, and the last of which is followed by a putative transcription termination site with inverted repeats. The amino acid sequences deduced by analysis of the reading frames are highly similar (with 32-49% identity) to the E1 alpha, El beta and E2 components of pyruvate, 2-oxoglutarate and branched-chain alpha-oxo acid dehydrogenases from different sources. The thiamin diphosphate binding, putative subunit interaction and phosphorylation sites of the E1 alpha of four reported branched-chain alpha-oxo acid dehydrogenases from different sources are very similar to those of the first open reading frame (E1 alpha) of bfmB. A similar result is also obtained with the lipoyl-binding site (lysine) and its domain of the E2 component of alpha-oxo acid dehydrogenases from different sources. The present data, along with the reported biochemical data, lead to the conclusion that bfmB encodes a branched-chain alpha-oxo acid dehydrogenase, which is composed of E1 alpha, E1 beta and E2 genes. This organization is identical to that of the 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase in B. subtilis.    Transcription of the Bacillus subtilis srfA operon is dependent on the transcriptional activator ComA. Mutational analysis of the srfA regulatory region suggests that two regions of dyad symmetry upstream of the srfA promoter may function in transcriptional activation by facilitating a cooperative interaction between ComA dimers.    The Bacteroides fragilis BF-1 fructanase-encoding gene (fruA) was cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli from the recombinant plasmid pBS100. The fruA gene consisted of 1,866 bp encoding a protein of 622 amino acids with a calculated M(r) of 70,286. The apparent M(r) of the fructanase, determined by in vitro cell-free transcription-translation and sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis analysis, was approximately 71,500. An alignment of the amino acid sequences of the B. fragilis BF-1 fructanase and the Bacillus subtilis levanase revealed that 45.5% of the amino acids were identical. The fruA gene was expressed in E. coli from its own promoter; however, no E. coli promoter-like sequence was evident upstream from the gene. A major E. coli transcription start point and a single B. fragilis BF-1 transcription start point were located. Expression of the fruA gene was constitutive in E. coli(pBS100) and B. fragilis BF-1. The ratio of sucrase activity to inulinase activity (S/I ratio) was constant for enzyme preparations from E. coli (pBS100), indicating that both activities were associated with the fructanase. For B. fragilis BF-1, the S/I ratio varied considerably depending on the carbon source used for growth, suggesting that a separate sucrase is produced in addition to the fructanase in B. fragilis BF-1. Localization experiments and TnphoA mutagenesis indicated that the fructanase was exported to the periplasm. Sequence analysis of the N-terminal region of the fructanase revealed a putative 30-amino-acid signal peptide. The enzymatic properties of the purified fructanase were investigated.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    The cryIIIA gene encoding a coleopteran-specific toxin is poorly expressed in Bacillus thuringiensis when cloned in a low-copy-number plasmid. This weak expression is observed when the gene is cloned only with its promoter and its putative terminator. cryIIIA gene expression was analyzed by using deletion derivatives of a larger DNA fragment carrying the toxin gene and additional adjacent sequences. The results indicate that a 1-kb DNA fragment located 400 bp upstream of the promoter strongly enhances CryIIIA production in B. thuringiensis sporulating cells. Similar results were obtained when the low-copy-number plasmid pHT304 carrying transcriptional fusions between upstream regions of cryIIIA and the lacZ gene was used. Analysis of the start sites, the sizes, and the amounts of cryIIIA-specific mRNAs shows that the enhancement occurs at the transcriptional level by increasing the number of cryIIIA-specific transcripts from the onset of sporulation to about 6 h after the onset of sporulation. The nucleotide sequence of the 1-kb activating fragment and of the 700 bp containing the promoter region and the 5&apos; end of cryIIIA were determined. No potential protein-coding sequences were found upstream of the promoter. The major characteristic of the 1-kb activating fragment is the presence of a 220-bp A + T-rich region.    Penicillin-binding protein 4* (PBP 4*) was purified from Bacillus subtilis, its N-terminal sequence was determined, and the coding gene, termed pbpE, was cloned and sequenced. The predicted amino acid sequence of PBP 4* exhibited similarity to those of other penicillin-recognizing enzymes. Downstream of pbpE there was a second gene, termed orf2, which exhibited sequence similarity with aspartate racemase. The two genes were found to constitute an operon adjacent to and divergently transcribed from the sacB gene at 296 degrees on the chromosomal map. A weak beta-lactamase activity was associated with PBP 4*, but no enzymatic activity was found for the product of orf2. Mutation of pbpE, orf2, or both genes resulted in no observable effect on growth, sporulation, spore heat resistance, or spore germination. A translational pbpE-lacZ fusion was weakly expressed during vegetative growth and was significantly induced at the onset of sporulation. This induction depended on the activity of the spo0A product in relieving repression by the abrB repressor. A single transcription start site which was apparently dependent on E sigma A was detected upstream of pbpE.    We reported previously the cloning and sequence of the Bacillus subtilis infB gene which encodes the essential IF2 factor required for initiation of translation (K. Shazand, J. Tucker, R. Chiang, K. Stansmore, H. U. Sperling-Petersen, M. Grunberg-Manago, J. C. Rabinowitz, and T. Leighton, J. Bacteriol. 172:2675-2687, 1990). The location of the 5&apos; border of the infB operon was investigated by using integrative plasmids carrying various DNA fragments from the region upstream of the infB gene. The lethal effect of disruption of the infB transcriptional unit could be suppressed when the integrated plasmid introduced the spac promoter upstream of the infB operon and transformants were selected in conditions of induction of spac expression. Such an integrated plasmid was used as a starting point to clone the promoter of the infB operon. Primer extension mapping suggests that a single sigma A-type promoter controls transcription of the infB operon. The sequence of a 5,760-bp region encompassing the infB gene was determined. The infB operon is located immediately downstream of the polC gene and comprises seven open reading frames, four of which appear to be the homologs of genes present in the same order in the Escherichia coli infB operon, including nusA. The striking similarity between the E. coli and B. subtilis infB operons suggests that the function of each gene pair is conserved and that the B. subtilis NusA homolog, which is 124 residues shorter than its E. coli counterpart, could play a role similar to its role in E. coli.    ComA is a response regulator protein of Bacillus subtilis which is required for the transcription of several genes which are involved in late-growth expression and in responses to environmental stress. Among these genes are degQ, gsiA, and srfA. The last is an operon needed for the development of genetic competence, surfactin production, and normal sporulation. We show here that partially purified ComA protein, isolated from an overproducing Escherichia coli strain, is phosphorylated in vitro by incubation with acetyl phosphate and that ComA could bind specifically to a DNA fragment containing the promoter of srfA and associated sequences. The binding affinity is enhanced when ComA is phosphorylated. DNase I protection analysis identified two protected sites located upstream from the srfA promoter. The presence of DNase I-hypersensitive bonds induced by ComA binding which are located between the protected sequences is consistent with a model for ComA action involving the bending of DNA.    The cryIVA gene encodes a component of the delta-endotoxin of Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis. By S1 nuclease mapping and primer extension analysis, we have identified the transcriptional initiation site of cryIVA. The transcriptional activity from the promoter was detected only for the sporulating cells more than 3 h after onset of the stationary phase. Upstream from the cryIVA transcriptional initiation site was found a nucleotide sequence partially homologous to the promoter consensus sequence for the E sigma E holoenzyme of Bacillus subtilis. Thus, it was strongly suggested that the identified cryIVA promoter, like some other crystal protein gene promoters, was under the control of sigma 35, the B. thuringiensis homolog of sigma E.    We have established a time course for the early morphological events of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis and related this to changes in gene expression, particularly those occurring in the prespore compartment. We have also systematically studied the effects of mutations in various regulatory (spo) genes on prespore-specific gene expression. On the basis of these results, and those of other laboratories, at least four distinct temporal classes of prespore-specific gene expression can now be distinguished. The first class begins within 15 min of the formation of the spore septum, and requires the sigma F form of RNA polymerase. The second class, also directed by RNA polymerase containing sigma F, begins soon after the completion of prespore engulfment, and depends on an intercellular signal from the mother cell. This transcription results in synthesis of sigma G. However, sigma G activity, directing the third class of gene expression, appears only about 30 min later and is dependent on the completion of prespore engulfment and on further interactions with the mother cell. The fourth class of gene expression has been described. The results demonstrate that the prespore programme of gene expression incorporates a series of control points modulated by information from the mother cell and on progress through the morphogenetic process.    Endospore formation in Bacillus subtilis is a morphologically complex process in which the bacterium divides into two compartments (forespore and mother cell) that follow different developmental paths. Compartment-specific transcription in the forespore is initiated by RNA polymerase containing sigma F, and results in the forespore-specific production of sigma G, which directs most of the subsequent forespore-specific transcription. The activity of sigma F is thought to be restricted to the forespore by the sigma factor antagonist SpoIIAB. We used antibodies against SpoIIAB to monitor its accumulation during sporulation. We found that SpoIIAB accumulates early after the initiation of sporulation, and that it was present in the mother-cell compartment 2h after sigma F became active in the forespore. SpoIIAB disappeared preferentially from the forespore during development, and its disappearance from the forespore compartment correlated with the activation of sigma G in that compartment, raising the possibility that SpoIIAB may be involved regulating sigma G activity. We tested whether SpoIIAB could antagonize sigma G activity by replacing the sigma F-dependent promoter that drives expression of spoIIIG, the structural gene for sigma G, with a sigma H-dependent promoter. This resulted in a lytic phenotype that was suppressed by the simultaneous expression of a plasmid-borne copy of spoIIAB. This suggests that SpoIIAB can suppress this effect of sigma G expression. Moreover, these cells formed spores efficiently.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    1H-NMR experiments have been performed on transcription factor 1 (TF1) encoded by Bacillus subtilis phage SPO1. To study this 22-kDa homodimeric DNA-binding protein, a selective 2H-labeling strategy has been employed. Complete sequence-specific assignments of all the resonances from the five aromatic residues were determined by a modified standard sequential-assignment procedure. The reduced contribution of spin diffusion upon the long-mixing-time nuclear-Overhauser-enhancement spectroscopy for the selectively 2H-labeled variants, as opposed to the fully 1H-containing protein, has allowed for the identification of the spin systems and of the long-range dipolar contacts between Phe28 and Phe47 protons in the protein core and between Phe61 and Phe97 protons. The latter suggests an interaction between the proposed beta-ribbon DNA-binding arm and the carboxy terminus of the paired monomer. A previously proposed TF1 structural model [Geiduschek, E. P., Schneider, G. J. &amp; Sayre, M. H. (1990) J. Struct. Biol. 104, 84-90)] has been modified using constrained-energy-minimization calculations incorporating the experimentally determined set of aromatic-to-aromatic contacts. This new model has been analyzed with regard to the relative mobility and the relative solvent accessibility of the aromatic residues which have been measured by the nonselective T1 relaxation times of the aromatic resonances for the fully 1H-containing protein and the relaxation time enhancements upon selective 2H-labeling, respectively.    Using improved procedures for the synthesis, amplification, and cloning of DNA complementary to bacterial poly(A) RNA, we succeeded in deducing the 3&apos;-terminal sequence of polyadenylylated flagellin mRNA encoded by the Bacillus subtilis hag gene. The site of polyadenylylation was found to be just upstream of the terminal stem-loop structure corresponding to the putative rho-independent transcription terminator of the hag gene. This corresponds to the major polyadenylation site of Escherichia coli lipoprotein (lpp) mRNA [G.C. Gao and N. Sarkar (1992) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89, 7546-7550], suggesting that the primary transcript is processed by endonucleolytic cleavage prior to polyadenylylation in Gram-positive as well as in Gram-negative bacteria.    The cDNA of rat amidophosphoribosyltransferase (EC 2.4.2.14, ATase), which is the supposed regulatory allosteric enzyme of de novo purine nucleotide biosynthesis, has been cloned by polymerase chain reaction. The predicted open reading frame encodes a protein of 517 amino acids with a deduced molecular weight of 57,436 including a supposed 11-amino acid propeptide. The 16 amino acid residues next to the propeptide were identical to the N-terminal amino acid microsequence of a purified rat liver ATase, which is consistent with the cleavage of the propeptide from the proenzyme in rat liver. The derived amino acid sequence is the first sequence reported for a mammalian ATase and it exhibits 81, 41, 36, and 31% identity with the sequences of chicken, Bacillus subtilis, Escherichia coli, and Saccharomyces cerevisiae ATases, respectively. The molecular weight (M(r)) of 57,436 suggests a tetrameric structure of native ATase with a M(r) of 240,000-248,000. Southern blot analysis suggested that the ATase gene exists as a single copy in the rat genome. Northern blot analysis revealed that ATase is expressed at a high level in brain, heart, liver, and stomach. The ATase mRNA in brain, heart, and stomach was 3.5 kilobases (kb) and in liver the 3.5-kb band was observed as well as an additional band of 4.2 kb. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis showed that ATase is ubiquitously expressed in all tissues examined. Comparison with chicken ATase showed that 2 cysteine residues for an iron-sulfur cluster were conserved. Three conserved and two non-conserved consensus phosphorylation sites for cAMP-dependent protein kinase were found.    The kinetics of formation and dissociation of heparin-resistant transcription initiation complexes between Escherichia coli RNA polymerase and the rrnB P1 and P2 promoters from Bacillus subtilis were investigated using a gel retardation assay. The results suggest that the formation of polymerase-promoter complexes proceeds by a three-step reaction mechanism. The bimolecular collision between free RNA polymerase and the promoter creates a heparin-sensitive complex, which then isomerizes to an initial, and then a subsequent, heparin-resistant complex. We propose that a sequential mechanism best describes the bimolecular collision and that the forward rate constants predominate in the overall rate of heparin-resistant complex formation. At 35 degrees C, the association of polymerase with P1 and P2 was very rapid (ka = 1.5 - 2.1 x 10(8) M-1 s-1; kf &gt; or = 0.56 s-1). Direct information on the formation of the closed and intermediate transcription complexes and indirect information on the formation of open complexes suggest that guanosine tetraphosphate did not differentially affect any step between growth rate-regulated and non-growth rate-regulated rRNA promoters by more than 2-fold.    The initiation of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis is regulated by a signal transduction system leading to activation (by phosphorylation) of the Spo0A transcription factor. Activated Spo0A controls the expression of genes encoding different RNA polymerase sigma factors, whose synthesis and activities are related to morphological events and intercompartmental communication between the developing forespore and the mother cell.    Leishmanial parasites routinely undergo cyclic differentiation from promastigotes to amastigotes during their life cycle. This process involves both morphological and macromolecular changes. To study such changes, we used a axenic culture system which permits the continuous generation and cycling of Leishmania donovani from promastigotes to &apos;amastigotes&apos; in vitro. cDNA libraries were constructed from poly(A)+ RNA isolated from both the pro- and amastigote forms. Using differential cDNA hybridization techniques, 3 unique cDNAs clones (P17, A41 and A45) were isolated from the amastigote library. To assess whether these clones were differentially expressed by the pro-or &apos;amastigotes&apos; forms, they were hybridized to RNA isolated from each of these parasite forms in Northern and slot-blots. Results of these analyses showed that &apos;amastigotes&apos; had approx. 2-fold higher levels of the A41 and A45 RNAs compared to the promastigotes. Conversely, promastigotes showed approx. 2-fold higher levels of the P17 RNA than &apos;amastigotes&apos;. Nucleotide sequence analysis and comparison with those in Gene bank, revealed that the 3 cDNAs represent unique leishmanial genes. Comparison of the deduced amino acid sequences revealed that P17 open reading frame (ORF) had significant similarity with a soybean ribosomal protein S11; A41 ORF with a Bacillus subtilis spore germination gene (gerC) and A45 ORF with yeast stress-inducible protein (STI1). It is of interest to note that, of the 3 cDNAs identified, the A45-encoded protein was recognized by sera from patients with clinically active visceral leishmaniasis and was encoded by a single copy gene.    Replacement of the regulatory and secretory signals of the alpha-amylase gene (AMY) from Bacillus amylolique-faciens with the complete yeast pheromone alpha-factor prepro region (MF alpha 1p) resulted in increased levels of extracellular alpha-amylase production in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. However, the removal of the (Glu-Ala)2 peptide from the MF alpha 1 spacer region (Lys-Arg-Glu-Ala-Glu-Ala) yielded decreased levels of extracellular alpha-amylase.    sigma B, a secondary sigma factor of Bacillus subtilis, was found to increase 5- to 10-fold when cultures were shifted from 37 to 48 degrees C. Western blot (immunoblot) analyses, in which monoclonal antibodies specific for the sigB operon products RsbV, RsbW, and sigma B were used to probe extracts from wild-type and mutant B. subtilis strains, revealed that all three proteins increased coordinately after heat shock and that this increase was dependent on sigma B but not RsbV, a positive regulator normally essential for sigma B-dependent sigB expression. Nuclease protection experiments of RNA synthesized after heat shock supported the notion that the shift to 48 degrees C enhanced transcription from the sigB operon&apos;s sigma B-dependent promoter. The level of mRNA initiating at the sigma B-dependent ctc promoter was also seen to increase approximately 5- to 10-fold after heat shock. Pulse-labeling of the proteins synthesized after a shift to 48 degrees C demonstrated that sigB wild-type and mutant strains produced the major heat-inducible proteins in similar amounts; however, at least seven additional proteins were present after the temperature shift in the wild-type strain but absent in the sigB null mutant. Thus, although sigma B is not required for the expression of essential heat shock genes, it is activated by heat shock to elevate its own synthesis and possibly the synthesis of several other heat-inducible proteins.    The nucleotide sequence was determined for a 9.4-kb region of Clostridium thermocellum DNA extending from the 3&apos; end of the gene (now termed cipA), encoding the S1/SL component of the cellulosome. Three open reading frames (ORFs) belonging to two operons were detected. They encoded polypeptides of 1,664, 688, and 447 residues, termed ORF1p, ORF2p, and ORF3p, respectively. The COOH-terminal regions of the three polypeptides were highly similar and contained three reiterated segments of 60 to 70 residues each. Similar segments have been found at the NH2 terminus of the S-layer proteins of Bacillus brevis and Acetogenium kivui, suggesting that ORF1p, ORF2p, and ORF3p might also be located on the cell surface. Otherwise, the sequence of ORF1p and ORF2p gave little clue concerning their potential function. However, the NH2-terminal region of ORF3p was similar to the reiterated domains previously identified in CipA as receptors involved in binding the duplicated segment of 22 amino acids present in catalytic subunits of the cellulosome. Indeed, it was found previously that ORF3p binds 125I-labeled endoglucanase CelD containing the duplicated segment (T. Fujino, P. Beguin, and J.-P. Aubert, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 94:165-170, 1992). These findings suggest that ORF3p might serve as an anchoring factor for the cellulosome on the cell surface by binding the duplicated segment that is present at the COOH end of CipA.    Using a gene probe of the Bacillus subtilis groEL gene, a 7.3-kb HindIII fragment of chromosomal DNA of Bacillus stearothermophilus was cloned. Sequencing of 2,309 bp led to the detection of two open reading frames in the order groES groEL. Primer extension studies revealed one potential transcription start site preceding the groESL operon, which was activated upon temperature upshift. Northern blot (RNA) analysis resolved two mRNA species with lengths of 2.2 and 1.5 kb; RNA slot-blot experiments revealed an at least 10-fold increase in the amount of specific mRNA from 0 to 7 min postinduction followed by a decrease. The 9-bp inverted repeat characteristic of many gram-positive bacteria was found within the 5&apos; leader region of the mRNA. The groESL operon of B. stearothermophilus could complement E. coli groES(Ts) and groEL(Ts) mutants for growth at high temperature and for propagation of phage lambda.    To delineate the mosquitocidal regions of the ISRH3 (CryIVB) and ISRH4 (CryIVA) proteins, which are two of the mosquitocidal 130-kDa proteins contained in the crystalline protein bodies (CPBs) of Bacillus thuringiensis var. israelensis (BTI), a deletion analysis of these protein genes has been done. Based on the evidence that each 130-kDa protein had two mosquitocidal regions, N-terminal and C-terminal ones, and these two regions shared a common part in the center of the 130-kDa proteins, deleted genes on this region were constructed. As the protein products which lacked the central region had reduced activities, the central region could be important for the mosquitocidal activity. The mosquitocidal and non-mosquitocidal truncated gene products of 130-kDa protein genes were also applied to a cultured lepidopteran cell line, TN-368. The mosquitocidal proteins caused the swelling and disruption of the cells in spite of the insecticidal specificity of CPBs of BTI, but the non-mosquitocidal proteins did not. Therefore, TN-368 cells were sensitive to the mosquitocidal fragments of 130-kDa proteins of BTI under the assay conditions used.    Cloning and sequence analysis of a new open reading frame from Bacillus cereus reveals the relationship to a recently identified family of putative eukaryotic transcription activators similar to the yeast SNF2 gene product. As a result of comparative analysis of sequence features conserved in all members of this family, a gene from a chilo iridescent virus, as well as a putative helicase from Escherichia coli (hepA), can also be grouped into this family. The unexpected presence of prokaryotic and viral sequences in the previously purely eukaryotic SNF2 family suggests a defined subgroup of DNA helicases present in all species, with specific function in transcription activation.    sigma B is a secondary sigma factor of Bacillus subtilis. RNA polymerase containing sigma B transcribes a subset of genes that are expressed after heat shock or the onset of the stationary phase of growth. Three genes (rsbV, rsbW, and rsbX), cotranscribed with the sigma B structural gene (sigB), regulate sigma B-dependent gene expression. RsbW is the primary inhibitor of this system with the other gene products acting upstream of RsbW in the sigma B regulatory pathway. Evidence is now presented that RsbW inhibits sigma B-dependent transcription by binding to sigma B and blocking the formation of a sigma B-containing RNA polymerase holoenzyme. Antibodies specific for either RsbW or sigma B will coprecipitate both proteins from crude cell extracts. This is not due to the presence of both proteins on RNA polymerase. Western blot analysis of B. subtilis extracts that had been fractionated by gel-filtration chromatography revealed a single peak of RsbW that did not coelute with RNA polymerase and two peaks of sigma B protein: one that eluted with RNA polymerase and a second that overlapped the fractions that contained RsbW. Reconstitution experiments were performed in which partially purified sigma B and RsbW were added to core RNA polymerase and tested for their ability to influence the transcription of a sigma B-dependent promoter (ctc) in vitro. RsbW efficiently blocked sigma B-dependent transcription but only if it was incubated with sigma B prior to the addition of the core enzyme.    The sigma F factor is a regulatory protein that is responsible for directing gene expression in the forespore compartment of developing cells of the spore-forming soil bacterium Bacillus subtilis. The sigma F factor is encoded by the promoter-distal member of sporulation operon spoIIA, which consists of cistrons called spoIIAA, spoIIAB, and spoIIAC. Genetic evidence indicates that the activity of sigma F is negatively regulated by the product (SpoIIAB) of the spoIIAB cistron. We now report that SpoIIAB is capable of binding to sigma F and inhibiting its capacity to direct transcription by core RNA polymerase from the promoter for a forespore-expressed gene. SpoIIAB is an anti-sigma factor that may be directly involved in the compartmentalization of sigma F-directed gene expression.    Southern blot analysis of genomic DNA of the mesophilic lactic bacterium Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis strain IL1403, illuminated six rRNA gene clusters. Each cluster contains one copy each of three rRNA genes, displaying the typical eubacterial organization of physically linked 16 S, 23 S and 5 S rRNA genes. Five of the six rRNA clusters were cloned into plasmid pBR322. One recombinant plasmid, pSLCM6, containing a 6500 base-pair genomic DNA fragment, was characterized by physical mapping and the sequences encoding rRNAs and tRNAs were localized by Southern hybridization. This fragment contains a single operon composed of one promoter, a leader sequence, a 16 S rRNA gene, a tRNA(Ala) gene, a 23 S rRNA gene, a 5 S rRNA gene and a tRNA(Asn) gene. S1 nuclease mapping and primer extension analysis of in vivo transcripts localized one transcriptional initiation site 150 base-pairs upstream from the start of the 16 S rRNA gene. These procedures also suggest that this transcript is processed by an RNAse III-like activity similar to Bacillus subtilis; i.e. the L. lactis nuclease might be sequence-specific. The chronology of specific cleavages occurring during the maturation process of the precursor transcript is described. One interesting observation is that the regions flanking the 16 S and 23 S rRNAs containing the primary processing sites are identical and contain sequences that could be involved in transcriptional antitermination. S1 mapping of the 3&apos; ends of in vivo transcripts indicate that a terminator-like sequence a few base-pairs downstream from the distal tRNA(Asn) gene is inefficient in arresting transcription.    The pol gene of the thermophilic eubacterium Bacillus caldotenax was cloned in a plasmid and expressed in Escherichia coli. The PCR method was used to clone the gene with no previous knowledge of the gene or protein sequence. The 3,329-bp DNA fragment containing the structural gene for DNA polymerase was sequenced. DNA polymerase, as deduced from the DNA sequence, consisted of 877 amino acids, had a molecular weight of 99,452, and was structurally homologous to the DNA polymerases of the Pol I family (family A), which includes E. coli DNA polymerase I and T7 DNA polymerase. B. caldotenax DNA polymerase (Bca polymerase) purified from the recombinant E. coli strain was characterized. Like E. coli Pol I, Bca polymerase had 5&apos;--&gt;3&apos; exonuclease activity. The degraded product with the molecular weight of 65,000 was also purified and found to have polymerase activity. To overproduce this Klenow-type fragment of Bca polymerase, a recombinant expression plasmid pUI205 with a deletion in the 5&apos;-region of the pol structural gene was constructed. The DNA polymerase produced by pUI205 is more suitable for use in the dideoxy sequencing method than the other DNA polymerases that have been used for sequencing.    The spo0F gene of Bacillus subtilis encodes a protein that functions as a secondary messenger in a phosphorelay system controlling the initiation of sporulation. Transcription of the spo0F gene was known to be dependent on an intact gene for the transcription regulator Spo0A. In vitro footprint analysis revealed that Spo0A protein bound to two locations in the spo0F promoter region. Deletion of a 40 bp region upstream of one of the promoters (P2) abolished the activation of spo0F expression that occurs at the onset of stationary phase and sporulation. This 40 bp region contains a Spo0A-binding site. These observations are consistent with a hypothesis that Spo0A binding to this region is responsible for activating spo0F transcription. Additionally, Spo0A binding at a downstream site could modulate the level of this activation. Since Spo0F protein is required for the formation of Spo0A-P (the form needed for transcriptional activation) a positive feedback loop controls transcription of spo0F.    Bacillus subtilis sporulation is an adaptive response to nutritional stress and involves the differential development of two cells. In the last 10 years or so, virtually all of the regulatory genes controlling sporulation, and many genes directing the structural and morphological changes that accompany sporulation, have been cloned and characterized. This review describes our current knowledge of the program of gene expression during sporulation and summarizes what is known about the functions of the genes that determine the specialized biochemical and morphological properties of sporulating cells. Most steps in the genetic program are controlled by transcription factors that have been characterized in vitro. Two sporulation-specific sigma factors, sigma E and sigma F, appear to segregate at septation, effectively determining the differential development of the mother cell and prespore. Later, each sigma is replaced by a second cell-specific sigma factor, sigma K in the mother cell and sigma G in the prespore. The synthesis of each sigma factor is tightly regulated at both the transcriptional and posttranslational levels. Usually this regulation involves an intercellular interaction that coordinates the developmental programmes of the two cells. At least two other transcription factors fine tune the timing and levels of expression of genes in the sigma E and sigma K regulons. The controlled synthesis of the sigma factors and other transcription factors leads to a spatially and temporally ordered program of gene expression. The gene products made during each successive stage of sporulation help to bring about a sequence of gross morphological changes and biochemical adaptations. The formation of the asymmetric spore septum, engulfment of the prespore by the mother cell, and formation of the spore core, cortex, and coat are described. The importance of these structures in the development of the resistance, dormancy, and germination properties of the spore is assessed.    Products of the approximately 9.5-kb virB operon are proposed to direct the export of T-DNA/protein complexes across the Agrobacterium tumefaciens envelope en route to plant cells. The presence of conserved nucleoside triphosphate (NTP)-binding domains in VirB4 and VirB11 suggests that one or both proteins couple energy, via NTP hydrolysis, to T-complex transport. To assess the importance of VirB4 for virulence, a nonpolar virB4 null mutation was introduced into the pTiA6NC plasmid of strain A348. The 2.37-kb virB4 coding sequence was deleted precisely by oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis in vitro. The resulting delta virB4 mutation was exchanged for the wild-type allele by two sequential recombination events with the counterselectable Bacillus subtilis sacB gene. Two derivatives, A348 delta B4.4 and A348 delta B4.5, sustained a nonpolar deletion of the wild-type virB4 allele, as judged by Southern blot hybridization and immunoblot analyses with antibodies specific for VirB4, VirB5, VirB10, and VirB11. Transcription of wild-type virB4 from the lac promoter restored virulence to the nonpolar null mutants on a variety of dicotyledonous species, establishing virB4 as an essential virulence gene. A substitution of glutamine for Lys-439 and a deletion of Gly-438, Lys-439, and Thr-440 within the glycine-rich NTP-binding domain (Gly-Pro-Iso-Gly-Arg-Gly-Lys-Thr) abolished complementation of A348 delta B4.4 or A348 delta B4.5, demonstrating that an intact NTP-binding domain is critical for VirB4 function. Merodiploids expressing both the mutant and wild-type virB4 alleles exhibited lower virulence than A348, suggesting that VirB4, a cytoplasmic membrane protein, may contribute as a homo- or heteromultimer to A. tumefaciens virulence.    During endospore formation in Bacillus subtilis, approximately a dozen proteins are synthesized and assembled around the prespore to form a protective coat. Little is known about the assembly process, but several of the genes encoding these coat proteins are expressed in the mother cell compartment, where the proteins accumulate on the outer side of the developing endospore. Transcription of these genes is directed by the mother cell-specific sigma factor, sigma K, during the later stages of endospore development. sigma E may direct expression of the genes that encode proteins that function in the earliest stages of coat assembly. By screening for sigma E-dependent promoters, we cloned a gene, designated spoVID, required for assembly of a normal spore coat. Expression of spoVID was initiated at about the second hour of sporulation and continued throughout development from a sigma E-dependent promoter. The spoVID gene was located on the B. subtilis chromosome just downstream of the previously characterized hemAXCDBL operon and is predicted to encode an extremely acidic protein with 575 residues. Insertion mutants of spoVID produced refractile spores that were resistant to heat and to chloroform but were sensitive to lysozyme. Electron microscopic examination of sporulating spoVID mutant cells revealed normal morphological development up to about the third hour of sporulation. However, during the later stages of development the coat proteins assembled into aberrant structures that occurred freely in the mother cell cytoplasm and that consisted of reiterations of the single inner and outer layers that normally make up the spore coat.    The dnaJ gene of Lactococcus lactis was isolated from a genomic library of L. lactis NIZO R5 and cloned into pUC19. Nucleotide sequencing revealed an open reading frame of 1,137 bp in length, encoding a protein of 379 amino acids. The deduced amino acid sequence showed homology to the DnaJ proteins of Escherichia coli, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Bacillus subtilis, and Clostridium acetobutylicum. The level of the dnaJ monocistronic mRNA increased approximately threefold after heat shock. The transcription initiation site of the dnaJ gene was determined and appeared to be preceded by a typical gram-positive vegetative promoter sequence (TTGCCA-17 bp-TAAAAT). Upstream of the promoter region, an inverted repeat is located that is identical to those detected upstream of heat shock genes of other gram-positive organisms. A transcriptional fusion between the dnaJ expression signals and a usp45-amyS secretion cassette caused a significant increase in alpha-amylase activity after heat shock induction. Deletion mutagenesis showed that the inverted repeat is involved in heat shock regulation of the dnaJ gene. The conservation of this palindromic sequence in gram-positive heat shock genes suggests a common regulatory pathway distinct from the system used in gram-negative bacteria.    A number of Bacillus subtilis genes involved in NAD biosynthesis have been cloned and sequenced. One of the genes encodes a polypeptide homologous to Escherichia coli L-aspartate oxidase, and its mutation resulted in a nicotinic acid (Nic)-dependent phenotype; this gene was termed nadB. A second open reading frame (orf2) was found downstream of nadB, and an insertional plasmid separating orf2 and nadB also gave a Nic-dependent phenotype. This result suggests that orf2 may also be involved in NAD biosynthesis and that nadB and orf2 are in the same operon. Upstream of nadB was a third gene, transcribed in the opposite direction to that of nadB-orf2. The amino acid sequence derived from the third gene was quite similar to those derived from nifS genes of various nitrogen-fixing bacteria; therefore, the third gene was termed nifS. As with nadB and orf2, mutations in nifS also resulted in a Nic-dependent phenotype. The promoter regions of nadB and nifS overlapped each other and both contained -10 and -35 sequences which resemble those of E sigma A-type promoters. Transcription from both the nifS and nadB promoters, as well as expression of a nadB-lacZ fusion, was repressed by Nic. However, nadB transcription and nadB-lacZ expression were decreased, at most, only slightly by a deletion in nifS. The possible role of the nifS gene product in NAD biosynthesis is discussed.    Stimulation of diglyceride production via phospholipase C (PLC) hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine was an early event in the mitogenic action of colony-stimulating factor 1 (CSF-1) in the murine macrophage cell line BAC1.2F5 and was followed by a second phase of diglyceride production that persisted throughout the G1 phase of the cell cycle. Addition of phosphatidylcholine-specific PLC (PC-PLC) from Bacillus cereus to the medium of quiescent cells raised the intracellular diglyceride concentration and stimulated [3H]thymidine incorporation, although PC-PLC did not support continuous proliferation. PC-PLC treatment did not induce tyrosine phosphorylation or turnover of the CSF-1 receptor. The major protein kinase C (PKC) isotype in BAC1.2F5 cells was PKC-delta. Diglyceride production from PC-PLC did not target PKC-delta, since unlike phorbol esters, PC-PLC treatment neither decreased the electrophoretic mobility of PKC-delta nor increased the amount of GTP bound to Ras, and PC-PLC was mitogenically active in BAC1.2F5 cells in which PKC-delta was downregulated by prolonged treatment with phorbol ester. PC-PLC mimicked CSF-1 action by elevating c-fos and junB mRNAs to 40% of the level induced by CSF-1; however, PC-PLC induced c-myc mRNA to only 5% of the level in CSF-1-stimulated cells. PC-PLC addition to CSF-1-dependent BAC1.2F5 clones that constitutively express c-myc increased [3H]thymidine incorporation to 86% of the level evoked by CSF-1 and supported slow growth in the absence of CSF-1. Therefore, PC-PLC is a component of a signal transduction pathway leading to transcription of c-fos and junB that collaborates with c-myc and is independent of PKC-delta and Ras activation.    The Bacillus subtilis flhA gene lies in the major che/fla operon, a transcription unit that spans 26 kilobases (kb) of DNA. flhA encodes a 677-amino-acid polypeptide that is a strong candidate for an integral membrane protein. The sequence of FlhA displays substantial homology to a newly identified family of putative signal-transducing receptors that have been implicated in diverse cellular processes. FlhA is the first member of this family to be described from a Gram-positive bacterium. We demonstrate that flhA is a flagellar gene and that FlhA is required in trans for the formation of products from some, but not all, B. subtilis motility-related operons that are regulated by the sigma D form of RNA polymerase. We suggest that FlhA is a component of a signalling system that is involved with the formation of some flagellar gene products during the biosynthesis of the flagellum.    In Bacillus species, starvation leads to the activation of a number of processes that affect the ability to survive during periods of nutritional stress. Activities that are induced include the development of genetic competence, sporulation, the synthesis of degradative enzymes, motility, and antibiotic production. The genes that function in these processes are activated during the transition from exponential to stationary phase and are controlled by mechanisms that operate primarily at the level of transcription initiation. One class of genes functions in the synthesis of special metabolites such as the peptide antibiotics tyrocidine and gramicidin S as well as the cyclic lipopeptide surfactin. These genes include the grs and tyc operons in Bacillus brevis, which encode gramicidin S synthetase and tyrocidine synthetase, respectively, and the srfA operon of Bacillus subtilis which encodes the enzymes of the surfactin synthetase complex. Peptide antibiotic biosynthesis genes are regulated by factors as diverse as the early sporulation gene product Spo0A, the transition-state regulator AbrB, and gene products (ComA, ComP, and ComQ) required for the initiation of the competence developmental pathway.    When Bacillus subtilis encounters a nutrient-depleted environment, it expresses a wide variety of genes that encode functions in alternative pathways of metabolism and energy production. Expression of these genes first occurs during the transition from active growth into stationary phase and is controlled by a class of proteins termed transition-state regulators. In several instances, a given gene is redundantly controlled by two or more of these regulators and many of these regulators control genes in numerous different pathways. The AbrB, Hpr and Sin proteins are the best-studied examples of these regulatory molecules. Their role is to prevent inappropriate and possibly detrimental functions from being expressed during exponential growth when they are not needed. They serve as elements integrating sporulation with ancillary stationary-phase phenomena and appear to participate in the timing of early sporulation events and in fine-tuning the magnitude of gene expression in response to specific environmental conditions.    Heat-inducible DNA fragments of Bacillus subtilis were cloned with two different promoter probe vectors. The increased synthesis of the reporter enzymes seemed to be due to a transient increase in the transcription of the encoding genes. The structure of the heat-sensitive promoters resembles the consensus sequence of promoters recognized by the vegetative form of RNA polymerase of B. subtilis. Our results support data in literature that the heat shock response of B. subtilis is regulated by a different mechanism than in Escherichia coli, where alternative sigma factors direct the transcription of heat shock genes.    The Bacillus subtilis glpPFKD region contains genes essential for growth on glycerol or glycerol 3-phosphate (G3P). The nucleotide sequence of glpP encoding a regulatory protein and the previously unidentified glpF encoding the glycerol uptake facilitator was determined. glpF is located immediately upstream of glpK and the two genes were shown to constitute one operon which is transcribed separately from glpP. A sigma A-type promoter and the transcriptional start point for glpFK were identified. In the 5&apos; untranslated leader sequence (UTL) of glpFK mRNA a conserved inverted repeat is found. The repeat is believed to be involved in the control of expression of glpFK by termination/antitermination of transcription, a control mechanism previously suggested for the regulation of glpD encoding G3P dehydrogenase. Expression of glpFK and glpD requires the inducer G3P and the glpP gene product. A 2.9 kb B. subtilis chromosomal DNA fragment containing the glpP open reading frame was cloned to give plasmid pLUM7. pLUM7 contains a functional glpP gene as shown by its ability to complement various glpP mutants. Immediately upstream of glpP an open reading frame is found (ORF1). Disrupting ORF1 by plasmid integration in the B. subtilis chromosome does not affect the ability to grow on glycerol as sole carbon and energy source. With the present report all B. subtilis glp genes located at 75 degrees on the chromosomal map have been identified.    Multiple physiological and environmental signals are needed to initiate endospore formation in Bacillus subtilis. One key event controlling sporulation is activation of the Spo0A transcription factor. Spo0A is a member of a large family of conserved regulatory proteins whose activity is controlled by phosphorylation. We have isolated deletion mutations that remove part of the conserved amino terminus of Spo0A and make the transcription factor constitutively active, indicating that the amino terminus normally functions to keep the protein in an inactive state. Expression of an activated gene product is sufficient to activate expression of several sporulation genes in the absence of signals normally needed for initiation of sporulation. Our results indicate that nutritional, cell density, and cell-cycle signals are integrated through the phosphorylation pathway that controls activation of Spo0A.    Overproduction of the exopolysaccharide alginate by Pseudomonas aeruginosa results in mucoid colony morphology and is an important virulence determinant expressed by this organism in cystic fibrosis. Mucoidy is transcriptionally regulated by signal transduction systems and histone-like elements. One point of convergence of regulatory elements controlling mucoidy is the algD promoter. A newly described genetic locus required for algD transcription was characterized in this study. This DNA region, cloned from a nonmucoid PAO strain, was initially isolated on the basis of its ability to suppress mucoidy when present on a plasmid. The suppressing activity was observed in several mucoid PAO derivatives, including strain PAO568, in which the mapped muc-2 mutation is responsible for its mucoid phenotype, and in close to 40% of cystic fibrosis strains tested. Protein expression studies detected two polypeptides with apparent molecular masses of 27.5 and 20 kDa encoded by the region required for the suppression activity. The gene encoding the polypeptide with an apparent molecular mass of 27.5 kDa, termed algU, was further characterized. A functional chromosomal copy of algU was found to be necessary for the expression of mucoidy. Insertional inactivation of algU on the chromosome of the mucoid strain PAO568 abrogated alginate production and algD transcription. DNA sequence analysis revealed sequence similarity of the predicted algU gene product with sigma H (Spo0H), a sigma factor involved in the control of sporulation and competence in Bacillus spp. Physical mapping revealed that algU resided on the same SpeI fragment (F) as did the pruAB locus, known to be tightly linked with genetic determinants (muc) which can confer mucoidy in genetic crosses. When the chromosomal algU copy was tagged with a Tcr cassette (algU::Tcr), a tight genetic linkage of algU with pruAB was demonstrated by F116L-mediated generalized transduction. Moreover, algU::Tcr derivatives of PAO568 (originally carrying the muc-2 marker) lost the ability to transfer mucoidy in genetic crosses. These results suggest that algU, a regulator of algD transcription showing sequence similarity to an alternative sigma factor, and the genes immediately downstream of algU may be associated with a locus participating in the differentiation into the mucoid phenotype.    Regulation of nitrogen fixation genes in Rhizobium meliloti is mediated by two proteins, FixL and FixJ, in response to oxygen availability. FixL is an oxygen-binding hemoprotein with kinase and phosphatase activities that is thought to sense oxygen levels directly and to transmit this signal to FixJ via phosphorylation-dephosphorylation reactions. FixJ controls the expression of other regulatory genes, including nifA, that regulate the transcription of genes required for symbiotic nitrogen fixation. We have been studying the structural and functional features of FixL that are required for oxygen sensing. We constructed mutant derivatives and confirmed that FixL consists of 505 amino acids instead of 464, as originally reported. Hydropathy plots of the full-length protein, together with TnphoA insertional analysis, lead us to propose that FixL is likely to be a polytopic integral membrane protein containing four membrane-spanning segments. We have also constructed an N-terminal deletion of the FixL protein whose in vivo activity indicates that the hydrophobic membrane-spanning regions are not absolutely required for oxygen sensing in vivo. We also report that FixL shares homology in its N terminus with other sensor proteins, including KinA from Bacillus subtilis and NtrB from Bradyrhizobium parasponia. The region of homology comprises a 70-amino-acid residue stretch that is also conserved in two oxygenases, P-450 and isopenicillin synthase.    Post-exponential Bacillus thuringiensis cells produce both an endospore and a variety of intracellular inclusions. The latter are comprised of protoxins, each being specific for the larvae of certain species from at least three orders of insects. Following ingestion of spores and inclusions, toxicity results in the spores gaining access to haemolymph, a source of nutrients suitable for germination and growth. Most B. thuringiensis subspecies contain multiple, plasmid-encoded protoxin genes, often with several on the same plasmid. These genes have been manipulated in order to understand the basis of toxicity and specificity, information which is important to the use of these toxins as biological control agents. Some protoxin genes are in operons, and others are in close proximity, perhaps to enhance the chances of recombination, and some are on unstable plasmids. The arrangement of these genes is probably important for flexibility in the variety of protoxins packaged into inclusions by a particular subspecies and thus the capacity to adapt to changing populations of insects. Protoxins accumulate over a prolonged period during sporulation because of the sequential transcription from two promoters, each being dependent upon a specific sporulation sigma factor, the relative stability of the messenger RNA, and the synthesis of proteins which stabilize protoxins and perhaps facilitate inclusion assembly. During the post-exponential phase, spore and inclusion formation must be balanced so as to ensure that both are available to contribute to the survival of these bacilli.    Transcription of the major Bacillus subtilis autolysin gene (cwlB) was investigated. Deletion of the region upstream of the gene cluster lppX-cwbA-cwlB led to a loss of promoter activity. Primer extension analysis suggested that the cwlB operon is transcribed by E sigma D and E sigma A, the former transcripts being predominants at the exponential growth phase. Expression of the lppX-lacZ fusion gene was reduced by about 90% in a sigD-null mutant. A sin (flaD1) mutation caused a severe defect in transcription of the lppX-cwbA-cwlB operon. The sin (flaD1) mutation also reduced expression of a sigD-lacZ fusion gene constructed in the B. subtilis chromosome. Since the sigD-null mutant exhibits motility and autolysin deficiencies and filamentation, similar phenotypes in the sin (flaD1) mutant may be caused by reduction in expression of the sigma D protein.    The Streptomyces coelicolor dagA gene that codes for an extracellular agarase was cloned in the closely related bacterium S. lividans and transferred to the distantly related low G+C Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis and to the far more distantly related Gram-negative bacterium Escherichia coli. S1 nuclease mapping experiments identified a putative fifth promoter from which transcription of the dagA gene can take place, and accurately mapped the transcription termination site. The transcription terminator was specific for the Streptomyces strains and could terminate transcription initiated by promoters other than those of dagA. The agarase gene is efficiently transcribed in B. subtilis and E. coli, although pulse-chase experiments failed to detect the synthesis of agarase in these two bacteria.    Experiments were designed to allow isolation of Streptomyces coelicolor promoters that depend on the whiG sporulation gene, which encodes a putative sigma factor important in the sporulation of aerial hyphae. The strategy, based on earlier evidence that sigma WhiG is limiting for sporulation (K. F. Chater, C. J. Burton, K. A. Plaskitt, M. J. Buttner, C. Mendez, and J. Helmann, Cell 59:133-143, 1989) was to seek DNA fragments that inhibit sporulation in aerial hyphae when present at a high copy number. In a suitable Sau3AI-generated library of DNA from S. coelicolor A3(2), two inserts were found to inhibit sporulation. Both inserts caused expression of the adjacent xylE reporter gene present in the vector in a developmentally normal strain of S. coelicolor, but there was no xylE expression in an otherwise isogenic whiG mutant. S1 nuclease protection experiments were done with RNAs isolated from these plasmid-bearing strains or from the wild-type strain lacking either recombinant plasmid. In each case, an apparent transcription start site was found upstream of an apparent open reading frame (ORF) and just downstream of sequences that resemble consensus features of promoters for motility-related genes in Bacillus subtilis and coliform bacteria. Such promoters depend on sigma factors (sigma D and sigma F, respectively) particularly similar to the deduced whiG gene product. Each of the putative whiG-dependent promoters is within an ORF that is upstream of, and potentially translationally coupled to, the putative whiG-dependent ORF (although use of one of the promoters would necessitate the use of a different start codon, further downstream).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    A cassette containing a selectable cat gene and the lacZ gene without its own promoter has been incorporated into the mini-Mu bacteriophage genome. This mini-Mu derivative, referred to as mMu-Bs, can be used in Escherichia coli for the generation of lacZ transcriptional fusions to Bacillus subtilis genes cloned into plasmids. The resultant fusions can be analyzed in B. subtilis either as multicopy plasmids or as a single copy integrated via a Campbell-like recombination into the wild-type locus of the cloned fragment.    We have cloned and sequenced the DNA of alkaliphilic Bacillus firmus OF4 encompassing the cta operon that encodes a pH-regulated cytochrome caa3 oxidase. The gene organization is identical with that of the homologous Bacillus subtilis caa3 oxidase locus (van der Oost, J., von Wachenfeld, C., Hederstedt, L. &amp; Saraste, M. (1991) Mol. Microbiol. 5, 2063-2072). The deduced amino acid sequences of the four putative structural subunits (CtaC-F) indicate substantial similarity to caa3-type oxidases from other Bacillus species and to other members of the family of mitochondrial-type aa3 oxidases. A marked paucity of basic residues was noted in the cytochrome c-containing domain of CtaC, which faces the highly alkaline external milieu. We have also purified the enzyme as a three-subunit complex, with possible trace amounts of a fourth subunit. N-terminal sequence analysis of the two largest subunits confirmed them to be encoded by the cloned cta genes. An additional, minor caa3 component with distinctive chromatographic properties was noted during purification. Analysis of mRNA with a ctaD probe revealed an abundant 4-kilobase message of the right size to encode CtaC-F. The cellular content of this message varied with growth pH. Cells grown at pH 10.5 contained 2 to 2.5 times more message than those grown at pH 7.5, in good correspondence with the relative amounts of caa3 oxidase found in the cells. The ctaB gene, immediately upstream from the ctaC-F genes, was found to be transcribed onto a low abundance 5-kilobase message, which is likely also to encode CtaC-F. Levels of this message were not affected by growth pH.    The formation of spores in Bacillus subtilis is a developmental process under genetic control. The decision to either divide or sporulate is regulated by the state of phosphorylation of the SpoOA transcription factor. Phosphorylated SpoOA (SpoOA approximately P) is both a repressor and an activator of transcription depending on the promoter it is affecting. SpoOA approximately P is the end product of the phosphorelay, a signal transduction system linking environmental information to the activation of sporulation. Activation or deinhibition of two ATP-dependent kinases, KinA and KinB, to phosphorylate the SpoOF secondary messenger initiates the phosphorelay. SpoOF approximately P is the substrate for the SpoOB protein, a phosphoprotein phosphotransferase which transfers the phosphate group to SpoOA. The SpoOA approximately P formed from this pathway orchestrates transcription events during the initial stage of spore development through direct effects on a variety of promoters and through the use of other transcription factors, termed transition state regulators, whose activity it controls. Because commitment to sporulation has serious cellular programming consequences and is not undertaken capriciously, the phosphorelay is subject to a variety of complex controls on the flow of phosphate through its components.    MtrB regulates transcription attenuation of the Bacillus subtilis trp operon. We have shown that MtrB, either from B. subtilis or overexpressed in Escherichia coli, binds specifically to RNA from the leader region of the trp operon by a gel mobility-shift assay. This binding is tryptophan dependent. MtrB binds to a transcript terminated at the trp attenuator (-2 to +138) or a read-through transcript (-2 to +318). MtrB does not bind antisense trp leader RNA or single-stranded trp leader DNA. These results support the model in which attenuation is controlled by tryptophan-activated MtrB influencing the secondary structure of the leader region transcript to form a terminator structure.    We have cloned and characterized the sporulation gene spoIIB from Bacillus subtilis. In extension of previous nucleotide sequence analysis, our results show that the order of genes in the vicinity of spoIIB is valS folC comC spoIIB orfA orfB mreB mreC mreD minC minD spoIVFA spoIVFB L20 orfX L24 spoOB obg pheB pheA. All 20 genes have the same orientation; the direction of transcription is from valS to pheA. We show that spoIIB is a 332-codon-long open reading frame whose transcription is under sporulation control. The deduced amino acid sequence of the spoIIB gene product, a 36-kDa polypeptide, is highly charged and contains a stretch of uncharged amino acids that could correspond to a transmembrane segment. Surprisingly, mutations in spoIIB, including an in vitro-constructed null mutation, cause only a mild impairment of spore formation in certain otherwise wild-type bacteria. However, when combined with mutations in another sporulation gene, spoVG, mutations in spoIIB cause a severe block in spore formation at the stage (stage II) of septum formation. (As with spoIIB mutations, mutations in spoVG cause little impairment in sporulation on their own.) The nature of the spoIIB spoVG mutant phenotype is discussed in terms of the events involved in the maturation of the sporulation septum and in the activation of sporulation transcription factors sigma F and sigma E.    The initiation of sporulation of bacteria is a complex cellular event controlled by an extensive network of regulatory proteins that serve to ensure that a cell embarks on this differentiation process only when appropriate conditions are met. The major signal-transduction pathway for the initiation of sporulation is the phosphorelay, which responds to environmental, cell cycle, and metabolic signals, and phosphorylates the Spo0A transcription factor activating its function. Signal input into the phosphorelay occurs through activation of kinases to phosphorylate a secondary-messenger protein, Spo0F. Spo0F-P serves as a substrate for phosphoprotein phosphotransferase, Spo0B, which phosphorylates Spo0A. The pathway is regulated by transcriptional control of its component proteins and by regulating phosphate flux through the pathway. This is accomplished by several regulatory proteins, and by activated Spo0A, which regulates transcription of genes for its own synthesis. Spo0A-P indirectly controls the transcription of numerous genes by regulating the level of other transcription regulators and directly activates the transcription of several regulatory proteins and sigma factors required for progression to the second stage of sporulation. Although the pathway and regulatory proteins have been identified, the signals and effectors for these regulators remain a mystery.    Altogether 19 strains belong to 13 species of ribosomal protein mutants of Bacillus subtilis were tested in vitro transcription--translation system for their influence on the translation of alkaline protease gene (apr). It was found that 10 species (13 strains) of ribosomal protein mutants did affect the translation of apr mRNA. Streptomycin-dependent (Str-D) ribosomes almost did not translate the apr mRNA. Str-D inhibited the expression of apr gene at the translational level, but had no influence on neutral protease gene. There is a secondary structure complex at the translation initiation region of apr mRNA. When one of the secondary structure was destroyed by site directed mutagenesis, the translation efficiency was enhanced by 7.3 to 9.1 folds. The higher order structure of Str-D and Str-R ribosome were different and so were the affinity of Str-D and Str-R 30S subunits to the 5&apos; end of apr mRNA. These results suggest that Str-D ribosomes could not translate apr mRNA because of the secondary structure complex, low initiation strength of apr mRNA, and alteration of the higher order structure of the Str-D ribosomes.    The sequence of a cry gene from Bacillus thuringiensis var. aizawai HD133 was determined. This cry gene encodes a protein of 1155 amino acids, the molecular weight of which is 130622 Da. When the nucleotide sequence of this cry gene was compared with the nucleotide sequence from B.t. var. aizawai IPL7 and var. berliner 1715, only five nucleotide changes were found. Therefore, this cry gene should be grouped into the cryIA(b) gene type. A 72 nucleotide sequence upstream of the open reading frame of the cry gene was enough to conduct the transcription of the cry gene in E. coli. Using a promoter probe vector system, it was demonstrated that any DNA fragment containing this 72 nt sequence exhibited promoter activity in vivo. It is likely that a putative promoter sequence may be present within this 72 nucleotides region for the expression of this cry gene in E. coli.    This paper reviews the present knowledge of the structure and properties of small (&lt; 5 kb) plasmids present in Lactobacillus spp. The data show that plasmids from Lactobacillus spp., like many plasmids from other Gram-positive bacteria, display a modular organization and replicate by a mechanism of rolling circle replication. Structurally, plasmids from lactobacilli are closely related to plasmids from other Gram-positive bacteria. They contain elements (plus- and minus origin of replication, element(s) for control of plasmid replication, mobilization function) showing extensive similarity to analogous elements in plasmids from these other organisms. It is believed that lactobacilli have acquired such elements by intra- and/or intergenic transfer mechanisms. The first part of the review is concluded with a description of plasmid vectors with a Lactobacillus replicon and integrative vectors, including data concerning their structural and segregational stability. In the second part of this review we describe the progress that has been made during the last few years in identifying and characterizing elements that control expression of genetic information in lactobacilli. Based on the sequence of eleven identified and twenty presumed promoters, some preliminary conclusions can be drawn regarding the structure of Lactobacillus promoters. A typical Lactobacillus promoter shows significant similarity to promoters from E. coli and B. subtilis. An analysis of published sequences of seventy genes indicates that the region encompassing the translation start codon AUG also shows extensive similarity to that of E. coli and B. subtilis. Codon usage of Lactobacillus genes is not random and shows interspecies as well as intraspecies heterogeneity. Interspecies differences may, in part, be explained by differences in G+C content of different lactobacilli. Differences in gene expression levels can, to a large extent, account for intraspecies differences of codon usage bias. Finally, we review the knowledge that has become available concerning protein secretion and heterologous gene expression in lactobacilli. This part is concluded with a compilation of data on the expression in Lactobacillus of heterologous genes under the control of their own promoter or under control of a Lactobacillus promoter.    Many strains of Bacillus brevis were isolated from nature as very efficient producers of extracellular proteins. Strains identified as B. brevis including these protein-hyperproducers were reclassified into at least 6 species according to numerical analysis, DNA base composition, and DNA-DNA hybridization. We developed a host-vector system using appropriate strains of these Bacillus brevis as a host, which is excellent for the secretion of heterologous proteins. Utilizing the powerful promoters and signal peptide-coding regions of the cell wall protein gene, various expression-secretion vectors were constructed. The cell wall protein genes of these B. brevis are transcribed from multiple and tandemly arranged promoters. Transcription from P2, one of the major promoters among them, was enhanced at the early stationary phase of growth, when divalent cations in the medium was depleted and the cell wall protein layers started to be shed. Translation of the cell wall protein gene transcripts starts at the two sites located tandemly in the same reading frame. The two forms of secretory precursors, translation products from the two sites, are cleaved at the same position giving rise to the same mature proteins. The nucleotide sequence from the promoter to the translation start site is highly conserved in protein-hyperproducing B. brevis. For the efficient secretion of some heterologous proteins, protein-hypersecreting mutants had to be selected. The engineering of the signal peptide was also often necessary to obtain a good secretion of heterologous proteins.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    Bacillus subtilis is the best studied of the bacteria that make heat-resistant spores in response to starvation. The process of sporulation results in the formation of a cell type which is quite different in morphology from that of bacteria during normal growth. Sporulation requires the activation, in an ordered sequence, of many genes that are kept silent during vegetative growth. It also requires that these genes be activated differentially in two sister cells that are genetically identical. The sophisticated mechanisms responsible for both the temporal and the spatial regulation of gene expression are now understood in a fair amount of detail. They are likely to provide models which will make a valuable contribution to studies of development and differentiation in higher cells.    Previously we cloned and sequenced the polC gene of Bacillus subtilis and identified regions corresponding to various catalytic domains of DNA polymerase III, the enzyme it encodes. In the present study, by using primer extension, we have identified the transcription start site and a 139 nucleotide leader region upstream of the first codon. This region contains a DnaA box in the non-transcribed DNA strand. An RNA transcript of the leader would contain a sequence that could form a 29 bp stem-loop secondary structure followed by a strong terminator sequence, rich in uracil, before the ribosome binding site. Plasmids were constructed containing either the intact leader region or deletion mutations of the leader, fused to the Escherichia coli lacZ gene in an expression vector. Single copies of the fusions were then integrated into the B. subtilis genome by transformation. Studies of the expression of beta-galactosidase by the transformed cells supported the idea that the leader region is important in regulating polC gene expression.    We carried out an exhaustive deletion analysis of Bacillus subtilis ribonuclease P (RNase P) RNA, seeking sequences that are essential for its catalytic activity. A collection of partially deleted RNase P RNA genes was used to construct templates for synthesis, by in vitro transcription, of circularly permuted RNA molecules that lack various wild-type sequences. The mutant RNAs were assayed for catalytic activity in vitro, using a precursor of B. subtilis tRNAAsp as a substrate. Gap-scan deletion analysis revealed that most of the RNase P RNA sequence is important for activity; only two substantive deletions did not dramatically inhibit pre-tRNA processing in vitro. One part of the molecule (nucleotides 225-270) seemed particularly sensitive to deletion, but considering a collection of mutants with overlapping deletion gaps, it was possible to remove every residue in the RNase P RNA without completely abolishing its catalytic activity. Thus, the catalytic mechanism of RNase P does not depend absolutely on a single, particular nucleotide or local sequence for activity.    We have reconstituted Bacillus subtilis trp attenuation in vitro. Purification of the mtrB gene product (TRAP) to near homogeneity allowed us to demonstrate that addition of this protein plus L-tryptophan to template, RNA polymerase, and nucleoside triphosphates caused transcription termination in the trpEDCFBA leader region. TRAP acts by binding to the nascent transcript and preventing formation of an RNA antiterminator structure, thereby allowing terminator formation and transcription termination. Oligonucleotides complementary to segments of the antiterminator were used to demonstrate that formation of this RNA hairpin was responsible for transcription read-through. TRAP was found to be a 60-kDa multimeric protein composed of identical 6- to 8-kDa subunits, and its elution profile on a chromatographic column did not change in the presence of tryptophan.    Northern blot analysis of rat RNA from cell lines and isolated organs with a specific rat cDNA probe detected two GTP cyclohydrolase I mRNA species of approx. 1.4 and 3.6 kb. The ratio between these two species varies between 0.6 and 2.4 in different rat organs. Using primers derived from highly conserved regions in the rat and Escherichia coli cDNA sequences a human GTP cyclohydrolase I probe was obtained by means of reverse transcription and PCR (polymerase chain reaction). The human PCR product consisting of 555 bp was cloned and sequenced. It shows a 92% identity with the published sequence of the rat gene. The analysis of various human cell lines with this specific probe shows only one species of GTP cyclohydrolase I mRNA with an approximate size of 3.6 kb.    The enzymes of the Bacillus subtilis BsuBI restriction/modification (R/M) system recognize the target sequence 5&apos;CTGCAG. The genes of the BsuBI R/M system have been cloned and sequenced and their products have been characterized following overexpression and purification. The gene of the BsuBI DNA methyltransferase (M.BsuBI) consists of 1503 bp, encoding a protein of 501 amino acids with a calculated M(r) of 57.2 kD. The gene of the restriction endonuclease (R.BsuBI), comprising 948 bp, codes for a protein of 316 amino acids with a predicted M(r) of 36.2 kD. M.BsuBI modifies the adenine (A) residue of the BsuBI target site, thus representing the first A-N6-DNA methyltransferase identified in B. subtilis. Like R.PstI, R.BsuBI cleaves between the A residue and the 3&apos; terminal G of the target site. Both enzymes of the BsuBI R/M system are, therefore, functionally identical with those of the PstI R/M system, encoded by the Gram negative species Providencia stuartii. This functional equivalence coincides with a pronounced similarity of the BsuBI/PstI DNA methyltransferases (41% amino acid identity) and restriction endonucleases (46% amino acid identity). Since the genes are also very similar (58% nucleotide identity), the BsuBI and PstI R/M systems apparently have a common evolutionary origin. In spite of the sequence conservation the gene organization is strikingly different in the two R/M systems. While the genes of the PstI R/M system are separated and transcribed divergently, the genes of the BsuBI R/M system are transcribed in the same direction, with the 3&apos; end of the M gene overlapping the 5&apos; end of the R gene by 17 bp.    Sporulation of Bacillus subtilis involves the differentiation of two cell types, the mother cell and the forespore. Two key regulators of mother-cell gene expression are SpoIIID, a DNA-binding protein that activates or represses transcription of many different genes, and sigma K, a subunit of RNA polymerase that directs the enzyme to transcribe genes encoding proteins that form the spore coat. Previous studies showed that SpoIIID is needed to produce sigma K, but suggested that SpoIIID represses sigma K-directed transcription of genes encoding spore coat proteins. Here we show that a feedback loop connects the levels of sigma K and SpoIIID, such that production of sigma K leads to a decrease in the level of SpoIIID. The existence of the feedback loop was demonstrated by using antibodies prepared against SpoIIID to measure the level of SpoIIID during sporulation of wild-type cells, mutants defective in sigma K production, and a mutant engineered to produce sigma K earlier than normal. The feedback loop operates at the level of synthesis and/or stability of spoIIID mRNA, as demonstrated by measuring the level of spoIIID mRNA during sporulation of wild-type cells and mutants defective in sigma K production. Our results suggest that a rise in the level of sigma K during the stage (IV) of spore cortex formation causes a decrease in the level of SpoIIID, which, at least in part, establishes the switch to the stage V (spore coat formation) pattern of mother-cell gene expression.    The spo-87 mutation is one of two sporulation mutations originally used to define the spo0J locus of Bacillus subtilis. We now show that it blocks sporulation after completion of prespore engulfment (stage III). Surprisingly, the operon is expressed vegetatively, probably from a sigma A-dependent promoter, and its expression is shut down at the transcriptional level at about the onset of sporulation. DNA sequencing reveals that the locus defined by spo-87, which we now designate spoIIIJ, consists of a bicistronic operon. However, only the first gene is essential for sporulation; the function of the second cistron is cryptic. The predicted SpoIIIJ product has an M(r) of 29,409. It probably forms a lipoprotein and is rich in basic and hydrophobic amino acids. Mutations in spoIIIJ abolish the transcription of prespore-specific genes transcribed by the sigma G form of RNA polymerase but not transcription of the spoIIIG gene encoding sigma G. The SpoIIIJ product could be involved in a signal transduction pathway coupling gene expression in the prespore to events in the mother cell, or it could be necessary for essential metabolic interactions between the two cells.    The production of Bacillus subtilis extracellular proteases is under positive and negative regulation. The functional role of degR, one of the positive regulators, was studied in relation to the degS and degU gene products, which belong to the bacterial two-component regulatory system. Studies with a translational fusion between the Escherichia coli lacZ and the Bacillus subtilis subtilisin (aprE) genes indicated that the stimulatory site of DegR lay upstream of position -140, with the region upstream of position -200 being the major target. It was also found that degS and degU were epistatic to degR. These results suggested some relationship among the degR, degS, and degU gene products. The DegR protein was purified to homogeneity, and its in vitro effect on the phosphorylation reaction involving DegS and DegU was studied. For this purpose, a soluble-extract system in which the formation and dephosphorylation of DegU-phosphate could be examined was devised. The addition of DegR to the soluble-extract system enhanced the formation of DegU-phosphate. The enhancing effect was found to be due to the protection of DegU-phosphate from dephosphorylation. From these results, it was concluded that the positive effect of DegR on the production of the extracellular proteases is brought about by the stabilization of DegU-phosphate, which in turn may result in the stimulation of transcription of the exoprotease genes.    Transcription from the late promoter, PA3, of Bacillus subtilis phage phi 29 is activated by the viral regulatory protein p4. A kinetic analysis of the activation process has revealed that the role of protein p4 is to stabilize the binding of RNA polymerase to the promoter as a closed complex without significantly affecting further steps of the initiation process. Electrophoretic band-shift assays performed with a DNA fragment spanning only the protein p4 binding site showed that RNA polymerase could efficiently retard the complex formed by protein p4 bound to the DNA. Similarly, when a DNA fragment containing only the RNA polymerase-binding region of PA3 was used, p4 greatly stimulated the binding of RNA polymerase to the DNA. These results strongly suggest that p4 and RNA polymerase contact each other at the PA3 promoter. In the light of current knowledge of the p4 activation mechanism, we propose that direct contacts between the two proteins participate in the activation process.    A series of shuttle vectors for Bacillus subtilis and Escherichia coli was developed. These are derived from one basic construct composed of parts of the Gram+ plasmid pUB110 and the Gram- plasmid pBR322. They contain multiple cloning sites flanked by transcriptional terminators. In one plasmid, a vegetative B. subtilis promoter drives transcription of inserted genes. For the construction of operon and gene fusions, the cat of pUB112 and the lacZ gene of E. coli were employed as reporter genes. With these vectors, cloning and expression of genes as well as probing of regulatory signals can be performed in B. subtilis and E. coli.    Transcription factor beta gamma (RAP30/74) from rat liver was previously shown in biochemical studies to control the binding of RNA polymerase II to promoters by a mechanism analogous to that utilized by bacterial sigma factors, by decreasing the affinity of polymerase for nonpromoter sites on DNA and by increasing the affinity of the enzyme for the preinitiation complex (Conaway, R. C., Garrett, K. P., Hanley, J. P., and Conaway, J. W. (1991) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 88, 6205-6209). By constructing and analyzing mutants of beta gamma, we have identified a novel functional domain located in the carboxyl terminus of the gamma (RAP30) subunit. This domain shares sequence similarity with region 4 of bacterial sigma factors; in particular, it exhibits striking similarity to the carboxyl-terminal regions 4.1 and 4.2 of SpoIIIC (Bacillus subtilis sigma k). Evidence from biochemical studies argues that a mutant gamma (RAP30), lacking amino acid sequences similar to sigma homology region 4.2, is able to assemble with the beta (RAP74) subunit to form a mutant beta gamma (RAP30/74) with impaired ability to interact with RNA polymerase II.    Nine different expression-secretion cassettes, comprising novel combinations of yeast and bacterial gene promoters and secretion signal sequences, were constructed and evaluated. A pectate lyase-encoding gene (pelE) from Erwinia chrysanthemi was inserted between each one of these expression-secretion cassettes and a yeast gene terminator, generating recombinant yeast-integrating shuttle plasmids pAMS1 through pAMS9. These YIp5-derived plasmids were transformed and stably integrated into the genome of a laboratory strain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and the pectate lyase production was monitored. Transcription initiation signals for pelE expression were derived from the yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (ADC1P), the yeast mating pheromone alpha-factor (MF alpha 1P) and the Bacillus amyloliquefaciens alpha-amylase (AMYP) gene promoters. The transcription termination signals were derived from the yeast tryptophan synthase gene terminator (TRP5T). Secretion of pectate lyase (PLe) was directed by the signal sequences of the yeast mating pheromone alpha-factor (MF alpha 1S), B. amyloliquefaciens alpha-amylase (AMYS) and Er. chrysanthemi pectate lyase (pelES). The ADC1P-MF alpha 1S expression-secretion system proved to be the most efficient control cassette for the expression of pelE and the secretion of PLe in S. cerevisiae.    We have developed a novel expression vector based on the bacteriophage phi 105, and employed it for the production of mutant beta-lactamases in Bacillus subtilis. Expression of the beta-lactamase-encoding gene was low when cloned into the prophage under the control of its own promoter. However, expression was considerably elevated when the gene was inserted into the phage genome in the same orientation as phage transcription. A defective phi 105 vector was constructed with a deletion removing a region needed for cell lysis, and with a mutation in the immunity repressor, rendering it temperature sensitive. Production of beta-lactamase could then be induced by a shift in temperature and without concomitant cell lysis, facilitating purification of the protein from the culture supernatant. This phage has considerable potential for development as a vector for controllable production of heterologous proteins in B. subtilis.    Nisin produced by Lactococcus lactis 6F3 is used as a food preservative and is the most important member of a group of peptide-antibiotics containing lanthionine bridges (lantibiotics) (N. Schnell, K.-D. Entian, U. Schneider, F. Gotz, H. Zahner, R. Kellner, and G. Jung, Nature [London] 333:276-278, 1988). Nisin is ribosomally synthesized, and its structural gene, nisA, encodes a prepeptide that is posttranslationally modified, revealing the active lantibiotic (C. Kaletta and K.-D. Entian, J. Bacteriol. 171:1597-1601, 1989). Adjacent to nisA, the additional genes nisB, nisT, and nisC were identified. Over their entire sequences, these genes were homologous to genes recently identified as important for the biosynthesis of lantibiotics, that is, subtilin from Bacillus subtilis ATCC 6633 and epidermin from Staphylococcus epidermidis Tu 3298. Genes nisB, nisT, and nisC corresponded to open reading frames of 993, 600, and 418 amino acid residues, respectively. The nisT open reading frame is homologous to proteins of the HlyB (hemolysin B protein of Escherichia coli) subfamily. Proteins of this subfamily are responsible for the secretion of a variety of compounds, including large polypeptides, polysaccharides, and anti-drug tumors, indicating that NisT may be involved in nisin transport. Northern (RNA) blot analysis revealed a 0.3-kb transcript for the nisA structural gene, and the transcriptional start point of the nisA gene was determined by primer extension. Additionally, a mRNA of at least 3 kb was identified by using a hybridization probe specific to nisB. Antibodies were raised against the NisB protein, and Western blot (immunoblot) analysis revealed a molecular weight of about 115 kDa, which is in accordance with the theoretical protein size of 117.5 kDa as calculated from the nisB open reading frame. Several amphipathic transmembrane alpha-helices indicated that NisB is associated with the membrane. This was confirmed by preparing L. lactis vesicles. The NisB protein was tightly associated with the vesicle fraction and was released by sodium dodecyl sulfate treatment only. These results suggest that NisB is membrane associated and that nisin biosynthesis occurs at the cell membrane.    The production of protective antigen (PA), the common component of the two anthrax toxins, is influenced by the environment. In order to examine factors involved in its regulation, a transcriptional fusion between the promoter region of the PA gene (pag) and the lacZ gene was constructed and introduced into Bacillus anthracis Sterne. Activity of the pag promoter was followed by measuring beta-galactosidase activities under various growth and medium conditions. Expression from the pag promoter was observed throughout exponential-phase and was maximal in early stationary phase. The activity of the pag promoter was stimulated by the addition of glucose in the medium.    The sigma subunit of bacterial RNA polymerase is required for specific binding to promoters. One region in most sigma factors makes sequence-specific contacts at the -10 region of its cognate promoters. To test the role of the amino acids in this -10 binding region, we examined the effects of 49 single-amino-acid substitutions in sigma E from Bacillus subtilis. We assayed the effect of each amino acid substitution on spore formation because sigma E is essential for endospore formation in B. subtilis. Our results showed that substitutions at several positions, including the highly conserved aromatic amino acid at position 102, had little or no detectable effect. Substitutions at another position, position 117, produced dominant negative mutations; we suggest that these mutations allow RNA polymerase containing the mutant sigma factor to bind specifically to promoters but prevent transcription initiation. Of the recessive defective alleles, those that produced substitutions at positions 113, 115, and 120 produced the most defective sigma factors. These results suggest that the residues at or near these positions in wild-type sigma E play important roles in sigma E function.    The Bacillus subtilis rpsD gene, which encodes ribosomal protein S4, is subject to autogenous regulation. Repression of rpsD expression by excess S4 protein was previously shown to be affected by mutations in the leader region of the gene. A large number of deletion and point mutations in the leader region were generated, and their effect on repression by S4 in vivo was tested. These studies indicated that the required region was within positions +30 to +190 relative to the transcription start point. Replacement of the rpsD promoter with a lac promoter derivative which is expressed in B. subtilis had no effect, indicating that repression by S4 occurs at a level subsequent to transcription initiation. The rpsD leader region was isolated from several Bacillus species. Members of the B. subtilis group, as defined by analysis of 16S rRNA sequence, contained a leader region target site very closely related in structure to that of B. subtilis, despite considerable primary sequence variation; the B. brevis rpsD leader contained some but not all of the structural features found in the regulatory target sites of the other Bacillus species. Very little similarity to the Escherichia coli alpha operon S4 target site was found at either the primary-sequence or the secondary-structure level. Mutagenic and phylogenetic data indicate that the secondary structure of the leader region regulatory target site contains two large stem-loop domains. The first of these helices has a side loop which is essential for autoregulation, is highly conserved among Bacillus rpsD genes, and is similar to a region of 16S rRNA important in S4 binding.    Mutation of the divIVB locus in Bacillus subtilis causes frequent misplacement of the division septum, resulting in circular minicells, short rods, and filaments of various sizes. The divIVB1 mutant allele maps to a region of the chromosome also known to encode sporulation (spo0B, spoIVF, spoIIB) and cell shape (rodB) determinants. This study reports the cloning and sequence analysis of 4.4 kb of the B. subtilis chromosome encompassing the divIVB locus. This region contains five open reading frames (ORFs) arranged in two functionally distinct gene clusters (mre and min) and transcribed colinearly with the direction of replication. Although sequence analysis reveals potential promoters preceding each gene cluster, studies with integrational plasmids suggest that all five ORFs are part of a single transcription unit. The first gene cluster contains three ORFs (mreBCD) homologous to the mre genes of Escherichia coli. We show that rodB1 is allelic to mreD and identify the rodB1 mutation. The second gene cluster contains two ORFs (minCD) homologous to minC and minD of E. coli but lacks a minE homolog. We show that divIVB1 is allelic to minD and identify two mutations in the divIVB1 allele. Insertional inactivation of either minC or minD or the presence of the divIVB region on plasmids produces a severe minicell phenotype in wild-type cells. Moreover, E. coli cells carrying the divIVB region on a low-copy-number plasmid produce minicells, suggesting that a product of this locus may retain some function across species boundaries.    Induction of the Bacillus subtilis sacB gene and sacPA operon and Escherichia coli bgl operon is mediated by structurally homologous antiterminators encoded by the sacY, sacT, and bglG genes, respectively. When activated, these proteins prevent early transcription termination at terminators located in the leader regions of the three operons. BglG was previously shown to bind in vitro to an imperfectly palindromic 29-nucleotide RNA sequence located upstream of the terminator and partially overlapping with it [Houman, F., Diaz-Torres, M.R. &amp; Wright, A. (1990) Cell 62, 1153-1163]. Similar motifs, here termed ribonucleic antiterminators (RATs), strongly conserved in sequence and in position, are found in the leader of both sacB and sacPA. Mutations were created in sacB RAT and tested in B. subtilis; this showed that sacB RAT is the target for SacY-mediated induction of sacB and that a stem-loop structure in the mRNA is required for regulatory function. Mutations increasing the similarity of the sacB RAT with those of sacPA or bgl rendered sacB inducible by SacT or BglG, respectively; most of these changes did not strongly affect induction by SacY, suggesting that the nucleotides at these variable positions act as negative specificity determinants.    The Bacillus subtilis glpD gene, encoding glycerol-3-phosphate (G3P) dehydrogenase, is preceded by a promoter and an inverted repeat which is located between the promoter and the glpD coding region. The inverted repeat acts as a transcriptional terminator in vitro. Expression of glpD is induced by G3P in the presence of the glpP gene product. Full-length glpD transcripts can be detected only in glycerol-induced cells. The major glpD transcript is initiated from the glpD promoter but minor amounts of larger transcripts, possibly initiated at upstream glp promoters, can also be found. In uninduced cells short transcripts are present, corresponding to initiation at the glpD promoter and termination at the inverted repeat. Upon induction, these short transcripts disappear and are replaced by full-length glpD transcripts. The 3&apos;-ends of full-length glpD transcripts were mapped to an inverted repeat located immediately downstream of glpD. These results show that glpD of B. subtilis is regulated by termination/antitermination of transcription.    The initiation of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis is controlled by the Spo0A transcription factor which is activated by phosphorylation through a phosphorelay mechanism that is dependent upon the activity of one or more protein kinases. The enzymatic activity of one of these protein kinases, KinA, was found to be inhibited in vitro by certain fatty acids. The most potent inhibitors have at least one unsaturated double bond in the cis configuration and a chain length of 16-20 carbon atoms. Homologous isomers with a trans double bond are not inhibitory. Saturated straight- or branched-chain fatty acids are either much weaker inhibitors or have no effect. The inhibitors prevent autophosphorylation of KinA and are non-competitive with ATP. B. subtilis phospholipids were found to contain at least one as yet unidentified type of fatty acid that, when present in an unesterified form, inhibited KinA. The results suggest that the concentration of a specific unsaturated fatty acid may act as a signal linking the initiation of sporulation to the status of membrane synthesis and septation or some other specific membrane-associated activity.    The Bacillus subtilis gene senS, when present in high copy number, stimulates the expression of several extracellular protein genes during the onset of stationary phase, e.g. aprE. A novel integration vector, pINT, was constructed for transcription expression studies; it employed a unique method of promoter insert production for fusion with the lacZ reporter gene. Deletions were made of the 5&apos; flanking region of the aprE promoter to localize the site responsible for SenS-mediated enhancement activity. pINT was used translationally fuse aprE promoter deletion fragments with the lacZ reporter gene. A site between -177 and -415 with respect to the aprE start site of transcription was found to be required for the maximal SenS-mediated transcription increase from the aprE promoter. A multicopy vector containing the senS coding region without its native negative regulation was highly unstable in B. subtilis; this was due to the expressed senS insert.    Mutants (glk) of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) that are resistant to the non-utilizable glucose analogue 2-deoxyglucose are deficient in glucose kinase activity, defective in glucose repression, and usually unable to utilize glucose. A 2.9 kb BclI fragment, previously shown to restore a wild-type phenotype to a glk deletion mutant that lacks the entire segment, contains two complete open reading frames that would encode proteins of 20.1 kDa (ORF2) and 33.1 kDa (ORF3). ORF3 is transcribed from its own promoter, and also from a promoter that initiates transcription upstream of ORF2. A derivative of the temperate phage phi C31 containing ORF3 alone restored a wild-type phenotype when used to lysogenize the deletion mutant. The product of ORF3 is homologous to members of a family of repressor proteins encoded by xylR in Bacillus subtilis and Lactobacillus pentosus, and by nagC in Escherichia coli. Although this might suggest that ORF3 encodes a positive activator for glucose kinase, rather than the enzyme itself, ORF3 restored the ability to metabolize glucose to an E. coli glk mutant, and activity gels of cell extracts of E. coli containing ORF3 cloned in the pT7-7 expression vector demonstrated that the ORF3 product has glucose kinase activity.    The Lactococcus lactis chromosomal region containing the seven structural genes required for tryptophan biosynthesis was characterized by cloning and sequencing. All of the trp genes were identified by the homology of their products with known Trp proteins from other organisms. The identification was confirmed for five genes by their ability to complement trp mutations in Escherichia coli. The seven structural genes are present in the order trpEGDCFBA and span a 7,968-bp segment. Each gene is preceded by a putative ribosome binding site complementary to the 3&apos; end of the L. lactis 16S rRNA. Three pairs of genes (trpG-trpD, trpC-trpF, and trpB-trpA) overlap, and there is intercistronic spacing of 124, 46, and 585 bp between the trpE-trpG, trpD-trpC, and trpF-trpB gene pairs, respectively. No gene fusion was found. Upstream of the trp genes, a 457-bp noncoding DNA segment contains several regions fitting the consensus for gram-positive promoters and one region strongly resembling a transcription terminator. However, it seems unlikely that an attenuation mechanism similar to the one found in E. coli regulates tryptophan biosynthesis in L. lactis, since no potential leader peptide was detected. We propose that a mechanisms resembling that described in Bacillus spp. can regulate trp genes expression in L. lactis.    The adjacent sacX and sacY genes are involved in sucrose induction of the Bacillus subtilis sacB gene by an antitermination mechanism. sacB, encoding the exoenzyme levansucrase, is also subject to regulation by the DegS-DegU signalling system. Using sacXY&apos;-lacZ and sacX&apos;-lacZ fusions, we show that the transcription of the sacX and sacY genes is both inducible by sucrose and regulated by DegU. sacX and sacY appear to constitute an operon, since the deletion of the sacX leader region abolished the expression of a sacXY&apos;-lacZ fusion. The degU-dependent promoter was located by deletion analysis and reverse transcriptase mapping 300 nucleotides upstream from the sacX initiator codon. Sucrose induction of the sacX&apos;-lacZ fusion requires either SacY or the homologous SacT antiterminator, which is involved in sucrose induction of the intracellular sucrase gene (sacPA operon). Sequence analysis of the sacX leader region revealed (20 nucleotides downstream from the transcription start site) a putative binding site for these regulators; however, no structure resembling a rho-independent terminator could be found overlapping this site, unlike the situation for sacPA and sacB. Deletion of a segment of the leader region located 100 nucleotides downstream from this site led to constitutive expression of the sacXY&apos;-lacZ and sacX&apos;-lacZ fusions. These results suggest that the mechanism of sucrose induction of sacXY is different from that of sacPA and sacB.    To investigate a possible chromosomal clustering of glycolytic enzyme genes in Corynebacterium glutamicum, a 6.4-kb DNA fragment located 5&apos; adjacent to the structural phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPCx) gene ppc was isolated. Sequence analysis of the ppc-proximal part of this fragment identified a cluster of three glycolytic genes, namely, the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) gene gap, the 3-phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK) gene pgk, and the triosephosphate isomerase (TPI) gene tpi. The four genes are organized in the order gap-pgk-tpi-ppc and are separated by 215 bp (gap and pgk), 78 bp (pgk and tpi), and 185 bp (tpi and ppc). The predicted gene product of gap consists of 336 amino acids (M(r) of 36,204), that of pgk consists of 403 amino acids (M(r) of 42,654), and that of tpi consists of 259 amino acids (M(r) of 27,198). The amino acid sequences of the three enzymes show up to 62% (GAPDH), 48% (PGK), and 44% (TPI) identity in comparison with respective enzymes from other organisms. The gap, pgk, tpi, and ppc genes were cloned into the C. glutamicum-Escherichia coli shuttle vector pEK0 and introduced into C. glutamicum. Relative to the wild type, the recombinant strains showed up to 20-fold-higher specific activities of the respective enzymes. On the basis of codon usage analysis of gap, pgk, tpi, and previously sequenced genes from C. glutamicum, a codon preference profile for this organism which differs significantly from those of E. coli and Bacillus subtilis is presented.    An extracellular nuclease gene of Bacillus subtilis was cloned in the same organism by detecting the amplified enzyme activity, which was secreted from the transformant cells on an RNA-containing agar medium. An open reading frame encoding 289 amino acids was identified within the cloned fragment. The transcriptional initiation site was determined by nuclease S1 mapping and the promoter region showed similarity to the conserved recognition sequences for the E sigma A and/or E sigma E RNA polymerases. The production of the nuclease by the B. subtilis transformants greatly depends on the liquid medium used. SDS/PAGE analysis of the purified enzyme showed two adjoining bands of molecular mass about 32 kDa, and the NH2-terminal amino acid sequence analysis suggested that the NH2-terminal portion of the nuclease was subjected to a limited proteolysis after or during secretion. The nuclease was uniquely characterized as a Mg(2+)-activated ribonuclease which hydrolyzes RNA apparently nonspecifically into oligonucleotides with 5&apos;-terminal phosphate. The deduced amino acid sequence of this enzyme shows no obvious similarity with other nuclease sequences.    Endospore formation in the bacterium Bacillus subtilis involves generation of two cell types, each with different developmental fates. Each cell type contains an active chromosome, and treatments that inhibit DNA synthesis at the beginning of development inhibit spore formation. We describe experiments demonstrating that gene expression early during sporulation is coupled to DNA synthesis. Expression of several genes that are induced early during sporulation, before the formation of two cell types, is inhibited when DNA synthesis is inhibited. Genes that are affected require the transcription factor encoded by spo0A for normal induction. Spo0A protein is normally activated early in development by a multicomponent phosphorylation pathway, or phospho-relay. Altered function mutations in spo0A that bypass the need for the phospho-relay allow early sporulation gene expression, even when DNA synthesis is inhibited. These results indicate that inhibition of DNA synthesis prevents activation of the Spo0A transcription factor by inhibiting a step in the phospho-relay. It seems likely that coupling early developmental gene expression to DNA synthesis is a general mechanism to prevent inappropriate or unnecessary gene expression.    The erythromycin resistance gene ermD, which encodes an rRNA methylase protein, has an unusually long leader region (354 nucleotides). Previously, a single promoter-proximal leader peptide coding sequence was recognized from the nucleotide sequence, and erythromycin-induced ribosome stalling in this sequence was proposed to be required for the induction of methylase translation. We characterized spontaneously occurring and in vitro-constructed leader region mutations in an effort to understand the function of various segments of the long ermD leader region. A second leader peptide coding sequence was identified, and the location of insertion and point mutations that expressed ermD methylase constitutively suggested that translation of the second leader peptide is controlled by ribosome stalling in the first leader peptide. From Northern RNA blot analysis of ermD transcription, it appears that regulation of ermD expression is not by transcriptional attenuation.    We have isolated a homolog for the flavoprotein subunit of succinate dehydrogenase [succinate:(acceptor) oxidoreductase, EC 1.3.99.1] from Saccharomyces cerevisiae and used the obtained peptide sequences to clone and characterize the corresponding gene. It contained an open reading frame of 1923 base pairs and encoded a protein of 640 amino acids (M(r), 70,238) that showed approximately 49% and approximately 28% identity with the Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis enzymes, respectively. All features of the FAD cofactor binding site were completely conserved. Comparison of the deduced protein sequence with the N-terminal sequence determined from the isolated protein revealed an N-terminal extension of 28 amino acids that presumably represents a mitochondrial signal sequence. After in vitro transcription and translation, the preprotein was efficiently imported into isolated yeast mitochondria, cleaved to its mature form, and assembled into the membrane-bound succinate dehydrogenase complex.    We have constructed two broad-host-range Gram+/Gram- probe vectors designed for the cloning of bacterial genetic expression and secretion signals. These vectors make use of a silent reporter gene encoding the mature alpha-amylase from Bacillus licheniformis whose reactivation can easily be monitored on iodine-stained starch plates. Shotgun cloning of Enterococcus faecalis DNA fragments allowed recovery of several cassettes directing transcription, translation of the reporter gene and secretion of alpha-amylase. Sequence analysis revealed, in each case, the presence of a putative promoter, ribosome-binding site and signal peptide similar to those described in other Gram+ bacteria.    The complete nucleotide sequence of the URA1 gene encoding dihydroorotic acid dehydrogenase (DHOdehase) is presented. This enzyme catalyses the conversion of DHO to orotic acid and plays a major role in the pyrimidine pathway, as DHO is the effector of the positive control of the transcription of at least four genes, URA1, URA3, URA4 and URA10. Comparisons between the amino acid sequence of the yeast DHOdehase and sequences of DHOdehases previously isolated from Dictyostellum discoidum, Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis reveal no obvious homologies.    Formation of the asymmetrically located septum divides sporulating bacilli into two distinct cells: the mother cell and the prespore. The rigidifying wall material in the septum is subsequently removed by autolysis. Examination of published electron micrographs indicates that the two septal membranes then fuse to form a single membrane. Membrane fusion would be expected to have profound consequences for subsequent development. For example, it is suggested that fusion activates processing of pro-sigma E to sigma E in the cytoplasm by exposing it to a membrane-bound processing enzyme. Asymmetry of the fused membrane could restrict processing to one face of the membrane and hence explain why sigma E is associated with transcription in the mother cell but not in the prespore. Asymmetry of the fused membrane might also provide a mechanism for restricting the activity of another factor, sigma F, to the prespore. Attachment of the flexible fused septal membrane to the condensing prespore nucleoid could help drive the engulfment of the prespore by the mother cell.    The transcription initiation signals of the prtP and prtM genes specifying the proteolytic activity of Lactococcus lactis subsp. cremoris Wg2 were mapped by primer extension. The strength of these promoters was analyzed with promoter-screening vector pGKV410, and they appeared to be weaker than previously isolated promoters of strain Wg2. In addition, a putative transcription terminator downstream of the prtP gene was characterized by using the terminator-screening vector pGKV259. The putative terminator decreased the transcription activity of lactococcal promoter P59 by approximately 70% in both Bacillus subtilis and L. lactis. Deletion of a part of the stem-loop structure of the terminator decreased the negative effect on transcription, indicating that the structure could indeed function as a terminator of transcription. The proteolytic activity of the lactococcal host was enhanced by placing the originally oppositely oriented prt genes in tandem and replacing the relatively weak promoters upstream of the prt genes with the stronger promoter, P32, from the chromosome of L. lactis Wg2.    The structural gene coding for the lysine-sensitive aspartokinase II of the methylotrophic thermotolerant Bacillus sp. strain MGA3 was cloned from a genomic library by complementation of an Escherichia coli auxotrophic mutant lacking all three aspartokinase isozymes. The nucleotide sequence of the entire 2.2-kb PstI fragment was determined, and a single open reading frame coding for the aspartokinase II enzyme was found. Aspartokinase II was shown to be an alpha 2 beta 2 tetramer (M(r) 122,000) with the beta subunit (M(r) 18,000) encoded within the alpha subunit (M(r) 45,000) in the samea reading frame. The enzyme was purified, and the N-terminal sequences of the alpha and beta subunits were identical with those predicted from the gene sequences. The predicted amino acid sequence was 76% identical with the sequence of the Bacillus subtilis aspartokinase II. The transcription initiation site was located approximately 350 bp upstream of the translation start site, and putative promoter regions at -10 (TATGCT) and -35 (ATGACA) were identified. A 300-nucleotide intervening sequence between the transcription initiation and translational start sites suggests a possible attenuation mechanism for the regulation of transcription of this enzyme in the presence of lysine.    The Escherichia coli gene ssyB was cloned and sequenced. The ssyB63 (Cs) mutation is an insertion mutation in nusB, while the nusB5 (Cs) mutation suppresses secY24, indicating that inactivation of nusB causes cold-sensitive cell growth as well as phenotypic suppression of secY24. The correct map position of nusB is 9.5 min rather than 11 min as previously assigned. It is located at the distal end of an operon that contains a gene showing significant homology with a Bacillus subtilis gene involved in riboflavin biosynthesis.    Levels of transcripts initiated at a hut promoter in Bacillus subtilis were analysed. The addition of histidine to the culture medium increased the level of the transcript sixfold. In the presence of histidine and glucose together, the level of the transcript was reduced to the level in the absence of induction. Furthermore, addition of a mixture of 16 amino acids to cultures of induced cells and of catabolite-repressed cells decreased levels of the transcript 16-fold and 2.6-fold, respectively. Thus, it appears that at least three regulatory mechanisms associated with induction, catabolite repression, and amino acid repression, control the transcriptional activity of the hut promoter. Expression of the hut promoter-lacZ fusions that contained various regions of the hutP gene and deletion analysis of the hutP region revealed a cis-acting sequence associated with catabolite repression that was located between positions +204 and +231 or around position +203.    The regulatory unit of Bacillus subtilis strain 168 encompassing the structural genes of the N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanine amidase and of its modifier has been sequenced, and found to be a divergon consisting of divergently transcribed operons lytABC and lytR. Proteins LytA, LytB and LytC are endowed with export signal peptides. Mature LytA is a 9.4 kDa, highly acidic polypeptide whose deduced amino acid sequence points to a lipoprotein. LytB and LytC, the modifier and the amidase, are highly basic. After cleavage of the signal sequence their molecular masses are 74.1 and 49.9 kDa, respectively. These two proteins share considerable homology in their N-terminal moieties and have three GSNRY consensus motifs, characteristic of nearly all amidases. The C-terminal moiety of LytB exhibits homology to the product of spoIID. LytR is a 35 kDa protein which acts as an attenuator of the expression of both lytABC and lytR operons. Transcription of the lytABC operon proceeds from two promoters: PD, identified as P28-7 (Gilman et al., 1984), and an upstream PA. The former only is subject to LytR attenuation. Translational initiation of lytB and lytC is directed by UUG start codons, suggesting that lytA, B and C undergo coupled translation. Transcription of lytR is initiated at two start sites, one of which corresponds to a highly intense PA promoter whereas the other does not seem to share much homology with any of the known promoter consensus sequences. Both promoters are attenuated by LytR. It is confirmed that the synthesis of the amidase is controlled at least in part by SigD, i.e. that it belongs to the fla regulon and that its activity, or part of it, is co-regulated with flagellar motility. The role of the mutations conferring the Sin, Fla and Ifm phenotypes in the expression of the lytABC operon is discussed.    A 1974 bp synthetic gene was constructed from chemically synthesized oligonucleotides in order to improve transgenic protein expression of the cryIIIA gene from Bacillus thuringiensis var. tenebrionis in transgenic tobacco. The crystal toxin genes (cry) from B. thuringiensis are difficult to express in plants even when under the control of efficient plant regulatory sequences. We identified and eliminated five classes of sequence found throughout the cryIIIA gene that mimic eukaryotic processing signals and which may be responsible for the low levels of transcription and translation. Furthermore, the GC content of the gene was raised from 36% to 49% and the codon usage was changed to be more plant-like. When the synthetic gene was placed behind the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter and the alfalfa mosaic virus translational enhancer, up to 0.6% of the total protein in transgenic tobacco plants was cryIIIA as measured from immunoblot analysis. Bioassay data using potato beetle larvae confirmed this estimate.    The mother-cell line of gene expression during sporulation in Bacillus subtilis is a hierarchical cascade consisting of at least four temporally controlled gene sets, the first three of which each contain a regulatory gene for the next gene set in the pathway. gerE, a member of the penultimate gene set, is a regulatory gene whose products is required for the transcriptional activation of genes (coat protein genes cotB and cotC) in the last gene set. The gerE product also influences the expression of other members of the penultimate gene set (coat protein genes cotA and cotD appear to be repressed and activated, respectively). We now report that the purified product of gerE (GerE) is a DNA-binding protein that adheres to the promoters for cotB and cotC. We also show that GerE stimulates cotB and cotC transcription in vitro by RNA polymerase containing the mother-cell sigma factor sigma K. These findings support the view that GerE is a positively acting, regulatory protein whose appearance at a late stage of development directly activates the transcription of genes in the last known temporal class of mother-cell-expressed genes. In addition, GerE stimulates cotD transcription and inhibits cotA transcription in vitro by sigma K RNA polymerase, as expected from in vivo studies, and, unexpectedly, profoundly inhibits in vitro transcription of the gene (sigK) that encodes sigma K. The effects of GerE on cotD and sigK transcription are just the opposite of the effects exerted by the earlier-appearing, mother-cell regulatory protein spoIIID, suggesting that the ordered appearance of first SpoIIID, then GerE, ensures proper flow of the regulatory cascade controlling gene expression in the mother cell.    Previous deletion and complementation analysis has indicated that the region between trfA and kilBI (trbB) encodes trans-acting factor, designated trbA, required for conjugative transfer of broad host range plasmid RK2. In analysing the nucleotide sequence of this region we have discovered a gene encoding a 12 kDa polypeptide. The predicted amino acid sequence of this protein shows similarity at its C-terminal to KorA from the central control operon of RK2 and at its N-terminal to immunity repressor protein from phage phi 105 of Bacillus subtilis as well as the Sin protein of B. subtilis which regulates alternate developmental processes including sporulation, motility and competence. We show that TrbA represses transcription of both trfA (vegetative replication) and kilBI (trbB) (required for conjugative transfer and whose product has similarity to ComG, required for competence of B. subtilis) and may help to coordinate expression of both sets of functions. This region has similarities to some temperate bacteriophage immunity regions in modulating divergent transcription required for alternative means of propagation.    Signal peptidases (SPases) remove signal peptides from secretory proteins. The sipS (signal peptidase of subtilis) gene, which encodes an SPase of Bacillus subtilis, was cloned in Escherichia coli and was also found to be active in E.coli. Its overproduction in B.subtilis resulted in increased rates of processing of a hybrid beta-lactamase precursor. The SipS protein consisted of 184 amino acids (mol. wt 21 kDa). The protein showed sequence similarity with the leader peptidases of E.coli and Salmonella typhimurium, and the mitochondrial inner membrane protease I of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Patterns of conserved amino acids present in these four proteins were also detected in the Sec11 subunit of the SPase complex of S.cerevisiae and the 18 and 21 kDa subunits of the canine SPase complex. Knowledge of the sequence of SipS was essential for the detection of these similarities between prokaryotic and eukaryotic SPases. The data suggest that these proteins, which have analogous functions, belong to one class of enzymes, the type I SPases.    Menaquinone (MK) plays a central role in the respiratory chain of Bacillus subtilis. The biosynthesis of MK requires the formation of a naphthoquinone ring via a series of specific reactions branching from the shikimate pathway. &quot;Early&quot; MK-specific reactions catalyze the formation of o-succinylbenzoate (OSB) from isochorismate, and &quot;late&quot; reactions convert OSB to dihydroxynaphthoate, by utilizing an OSB-coenzyme A intermediate. We have cloned and sequenced the B. subtilis menE and menB genes encoding, respectively, OSB-coenzyme A synthase and dihydroxynaphthoate synthase. The MenB open reading frame encodes a potential polypeptide of 261 amino acid residues with a predicted size of 28.5 kDa, while the MenE open reading frame could encode a 24.4-kDa polypeptide of 220 amino acid residues. Probable promoter sequences were identified by high-resolution primer extension assays. Organization of these genes and regulatory regions was found to be menBp menB menEp menE. Expression of menE was dependent on both menEp and menBp, indicating an operonlike organization. A region of dyad symmetry capable of forming a stable RNA secondary structure was found between menB and menE. Culture cycle-dependent expression of menB and menE was measured by steady-state transcript accumulation. For both genes, maximal accumulation was found to occur within an hour after the end of exponential growth. The menBp and menEp promoters have sequences compatible with recognition by the major vegetative form of B. subtilis RNA polymerase, E sigma A. Both promoter regions also were found to contain homologies to a sequence motif previously identified in the menCDp region and in promoters for several B. subtilis tricarboxylic acid cycle genes.    At early stages of sporulation, the spoIIA locus is transcribed as a tricistronic (1.7-kb) operon, coding for sigma F and for two proteins that modulate the activity of sigma F. The locus is transcribed as a longer (2.9-kb) transcript at the late stages of sporulation. We show here that the longer transcript contains an additional open reading frame whose product has extensive sequence homology with DD-carboxypeptidases; the corresponding gene is designated dacF. Cotranscription of a morphogene, such as dacF, with the gene for a sigma factor suggests a way to couple transcription regulation with morphogenesis. The predicted N-terminal sequence of the DacF protein and the inhibition of sporulation by a translational dacF-lacZ fusion both suggest that the protein has a signal peptide for transport into or across a membrane. Expression of a dacF-lacZ transcriptional fusion was in the forespore. The 5&apos; end of the 2.9-kb transcript was determined by primer extension analysis. The region 5&apos; to the end showed no homology to promoters recognized by known sigma factors but was homologous to the corresponding region of the forespore-specific 0.3-kb gene of Bacillus subtilis.    The primary structure of Bacillus subtilis 105 kDa 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (E10) was deduced from the nucleotide sequence of the odhA gene and confirmed by N-terminal sequence analysis. The protein is highly homologous to E1o of Azotobacter vinelandii and Escherichia coli and of bakers&apos; yeast cells. The 5&apos; end of the odhAB mRNA was determined and the promoter region for the odhAB operon was localized to a 375 bp DNA fragment. The cellular concentration of the 4.5 kb odhAB transcript was found to be growth stage dependent; its concentration during growth in nutrient sporulation medium decreased abruptly at the end of the exponential growth phase and it was not detectable in early stationary phase. This decrease in the cellular concentration of the transcript is not the result of an increased rate of decay of the full-length odhAB mRNA, suggesting that transcription is down-regulated at the end of the exponential growth phase. The cellular concentration of the odhA and odhB gene products, E1o and dihydrolipoamide transsuccinylase (E2o), remains essentially constant throughout the growth curve in nutrient sporulation medium, indicating that both are rather stable proteins. In exponentially growing cells, glucose in nutrient sporulation medium repressed the cellular concentration of the odhAB mRNA, as well as that of E1o and E2o, about four-fold. This effect is most likely the result of a decreased rate of transcription from the odhAB promoter, since neither the stability nor the 5&apos;-end of the transcript were affected by glucose in the medium. It is concluded that the cellular concentration of the 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase multienzyme complex (E1o and E2o) is regulated mainly at the transcriptional level.    Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv has a single rrn (ribosomal RNA) operon. The operon was cloned and a region of 1536 nucleotides was sequenced, starting 621 bp upstream from the 5&apos;-end of the 16S rRNA coding region and continuing to the start of the 23S rRNA coding region. The 16S rRNA sequence inferred from the gene sequence was found to differ in one position from Mycobacterium bovis (nucleotide 1443) and from Mycobacterium microti (nucleotide 427). A single putative promoter was identified on the basis of similarities with the sequence of rrn operons of Bacillus subtilis and Escherichia coli. The regions of similarity include a -35 box, a -10 box, a stringent response element, antitermination signals, potential RNAase III processing sites and features of precursor rRNA secondary structure. Sequences upstream from the 5&apos;-end of Mycobacterium leprae 16S rRNA were also investigated. Homologous schemes of secondary structure were deduced for precursor rRNA of both M. tuberculosis and M. leprae; although the principal features are common to both species there are notable differences.    In Bacillus subtilis, two genes, thrS and thrZ, encode distinct threonyl-tRNA synthetase enzymes. Normally, only the thrS gene is expressed. Here we show that either gene, thrS or thrZ, is sufficient for normal cell growth and sporulation. Reducing the intracellular ThrS protein concentration induces thrZ expression in a dose-compensatory manner. Starvation for threonine simultaneously induces thrZ and stimulates thrS expression. The 5&apos;-leader sequences of thrS and thrZ contain, respectively, one and three transcription terminators preceded by a conserved sequence. We show that this sequence is essential for the regulation of thrS via a transcriptional antitermination mechanism. We propose that both genes, thrS and thrZ, are regulated by the same mechanism such that the additional regulatory domains present before thrZ account for its non-expression. In contrast to Escherichia coli, structurally similar regulatory domains, i.e. the consensus sequence preceding a terminator structure, are found in the leader regions of most aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase genes of Gram-positive bacteria. This suggests that they are regulated by a common mechanism.    Three open reading frames (ORFs) have been found in the region downstream of the luxG gene in the Photobacterium leiognathi lux operon. These genes (ORF I, II, and III) are not only closely linked to the lux operon and transcribed in the same direction but also show the same organization and code for proteins homologous in sequence to the gene products of ribB, ribA, and ribH of Bacillus subtilis, respectively. The Photobacterium leiognathi gene (ORF II) corresponding to ribA was expressed in Escherichia coli in the bacteriophage T7 promoter-RNA polymerase system and a 40 kDa 35S-labeled polypeptide has been detected on SDS-PAGE. Expression of DNA extending from luxBEG to ORF II inserted between a strong promoter and a reporter gene and transferred by conjugation into Vibrio harveyi did not affect the expression of the reporter gene. The results provide evidence that neither promoter nor terminator sites were present in the DNA between the luxG and ORF II indicating that these genes might be part of the lux operon.    The miniplasmid profiles of 18 Bacillus thuringiensis strains belonging to 8 different serotypes were determined using an alkaline hydrolysis method for isolation of low molecular mass plasmids. Nearly all the strains contained covalently closed circular (CCC) DNA species ranging from 2 to 5 species per strain and from 1.5 to 10.5 kbp in size (values corresponding to CCC forms). A 2-kbp plasmid from B. thuringiensis var. kurstaki HD-3a3b futura strain was used in Southern hybridization experiments to analyse relationships among the low molecular mass plasmids of different B. thuringiensis strains. This 2-kbp miniplasmid was present in most strains which show toxicity against lepidoptera. It was not present in those strains toxic against diptera (B. thuringiensis var. israelensis) or coleoptera (B. thuringiensis var. tenebrionis). The 2-kbp miniplasmid from B. thuringiensis var. kurstaki HD-3a3b futura was cloned and fully sequenced. Sequence analysis of the 2058 bp of the miniplasmid revealed the presence of an ORF (630 bp, 210 amino acids in size) that is preceded by a consensus sequence of B. thuringiensis crystal protein gene transcription promoters. No significant homology was observed with known B. thuringiensis toxin nucleic acid sequences or with other known sequences.    The levanase operon of Bacillus subtilis is controlled by RNA polymerase associated with sigma 54 factor and by the LevR activator that is homologous to the NifA/NtrC family of regulators. A &quot;-12, -24&quot; promoter is present at the appropriate distance from the transcription start site. The drastic down effect of base substitutions in the TGGCAC, TTGCA consensus sequence on the expression of the levanase operon confirmed the involvement of the &quot;-12, -24&quot; region in promoter function. Deletion derivatives of the upstream sequence of the operon promoter were constructed using translational levD&apos;-&apos;lacZ fusions and were integrated as single copies at the amyE locus of the B. subtilis chromosome. A cis-acting DNA sequence that is required for activation of the operon promoter by LevR was identified. This regulatory sequence is about 50 base-pairs long and is centered 125 base-pairs upstream from the transcription start site in a region containing a 16 base-pair palindromic structure. This region of dyad symmetry functions as a regulatory element when placed up to at least 600 base-pairs upstream from the &quot;-12, -24&quot; promoter, although the efficacy of activation is lowered. Thus, in common with most sigma 54-dependent promoters, an upstream activating sequence (UAS) is involved in the control of expression of the levanase operon. The isolation and characterization of eight mutations in the UAS region confirmed the importance of the palindromic structure in promoter activation. Moreover, the expression of the levanase operon was inhibited by placing the UAS in trans on a multicopy plasmid, probably through titration of the LevR polypeptide. In conclusion, the levanase promoter region can be divided into two regulatory sequences: the &quot;-12, -24&quot; promoter recognized by the sigma 54 RNA polymerase holoenzyme and the UAS, an inverted repeat sequence that is probably the LevR binding site.    The gene encoding sigma K, a transcription factor controlling mother-cell-specific gene expression at a late stage of sporulation, is interrupted by the skin element in Bacillus subtilis. The skin element is excised from the mother cell chromosome by a DNA rearrangement that depends on the spoIVCA gene product. This protein has no other role in sporulation than promoting skin excision and exhibits sequence similarity to a family of bacterial site-specific recombinases. An expression library of B. subtilis DNA in lambda gt11 was screened for the presence of a gene encoding a protein able to bind in vitro to an oligonucleotide matching the inverted repeat sequences present at the ends of the skin element. Several bacteriophages were found to contain the spoIVCA gene. A cell extract containing the SpoIVCA protein protected the inverted repeats and their neighboring sequences from DNase I digestion and methylation. SpoIVCA decreased the electrophoretic mobility of a DNA fragment containing its binding sequence and simultaneously bent the DNA. A single molecule of SpoIVCA bound initially to the repeat sequence followed by binding of a second molecule to create a complex straddling the recombination site.    A shotgun cloning of Bacillus subtilis DNA into pBR322 yielded a 2-kb fragment that suppresses the cold-sensitive defect of the nusA10(Cs) Escherichia coli mutant. The responsible gene encodes an open reading frame that is greater than 50% identical at the amino acid level to the E. coli rph gene, which was formerly called orfE. This B. subtilis gene is located at 251 degrees adjacent to the gerM gene on the B. subtilis genetic map. It has been named rph because, like its E. coli analog, it encodes a phosphate-dependent exoribonuclease activity, RNase PH, that removes the 3&apos; nucleotides from precursor tRNAs. The cloned B. subtilis rph gene also suppresses the cold-sensitive phenotype of other unrelated cold-sensitive mutants of E. coli, but not the temperature-sensitive phenotype of three temperature-sensitive mutants, including the nusA11(Ts) mutant, that were tested.    Three distinct 5&apos; ends of ftsA mRNA were identified by S1 mapping and by primer extension analysis. These are thought to represent three transcription start sites. The transcripts from the downstream and upstream sites were detected throughout growth. The transcript from the middle site was not detected during exponential growth but was detected within 30 min of the start of sporulation, when it was the predominant transcript. Insertion of a cat cassette in the middle promoter, ftsAp2 (p2), did not affect vegetative growth but prevented postexponential symmetrical division and spore formation. Transcription from p2 was dependent on RNA polymerase containing sigma H, and promoter p2 resembled the consensus sigma H promoter. Transcription from p2 did not require expression of the spo0A, spo0B, spo0E, spo0F, or spo0K loci. Northern (RNA) blot analysis indicated that ftsA is cotranscribed with the adjacent ftsZ gene. Multiple promoters provide a mechanism by which essential vegetative genes can be subjected to sporulation control independent of control during vegetative growth. In the case of ftsA,Z, the promoters provide a mechanism to permit septum formation in conditions of nutrient depletion that might be expected to shut down the vegetative division machinery.    The Bacillus subtilis gsiA operon was induced rapidly, but transiently, as cells entered the stationary phase in nutrient broth medium. A mutation at the gsiC locus caused sporulation to be defective and expression of gsiA to be elevated and prolonged. The sporulation defect in this strain was apparently due to persistent expression of gsiA, since a gsiA null mutation restored sporulation to wild-type levels. Detailed mapping experiments revealed that the gsiC82 mutation lies within the kinA gene, which encodes the histidine protein kinase member of a two-component regulatory system. Since mutations in this gene caused a substantial blockage in expression of spoIIA, spoIIG, and spoIID genes, it seems that accumulation of a product of the gsiA operon interferes with sporulation by blocking the completion of stage II. It apparently does so by inhibiting or counteracting the activity of KinA.    Two genes controlling motility functions in Bacillus subtilis were identified by DNA sequence analysis of a chromosomal fragment containing a strong promoter for sigma D RNA polymerase. Previous studies had shown that this sigma D-dependent promoter controls synthesis of a 1.6-kb transcript in vivo and in vitro. Sequence analysis revealed that the 1.6-kb transcript contains two open reading frames coding for protein sequences homologous to the Escherichia coli motA and motB gene products, respectively, and ends in a rho-independent termination site. Direct evidence linking these genes to motility functions in B. subtilis was obtained by precise localization by polymerase chain reaction of Tn917 transposon insertion mutations of Mot- strains, isolated by Zuberi et al. (A. R. Zuberi, C. Ying, H. M. Parker, and G. W. Ordal, J. Bacteriol. 172:6841-6848, 1990), to within this mot. operon. Replacement of each wild-type gene by in-frame deletion mutations yielded strains possessing paralyzed flagella and confirmed that both motA and motB are required for the motility of B. subtilis. These current findings support our earlier suggestions that sigma D in B. subtilis plays a central role in the control of gene expression for flagellar assembly, chemotaxis, and motility functions. Sigma F, the enteric homolog of sigma D, controls similar functions in E. coli and Salmonella typhimurium, and these factors appear to be representative of a family of factors implicated in flagellar synthesis in many bacterial species, which we propose to designate the sigma 28 family.    The complete nucleotide sequence of a 3484-bp Sau3A fragment, previously shown to carry the replication origin of the Clostridium butyricum NCIB 7423 plasmid pCB101 (6.05 kb), has been determined. Of the four open reading frames (ORF A-D) identified within this fragment, two (B and C) were shown to be encoding by in vitro transcription/translation assays. Evidence was obtained that both polypeptides are required for autonomous replication of the plasmid in Bacillus subtilis. ORF C is immediately preceded by a small ORF (C&apos;) that encodes a relatively small polypeptide (50 amino acids) that demonstrates significant homology with RepA of plasmid pLS1. Whereas the ORF C polypeptide (27,100 Da) exhibits no homology to any known protein, that encoded by ORF B (RepB, 43,039 Da) exhibits significant homology with the Rep proteins of the pC194/pUB110 subfamily of single-strand (ss) DNA plasmids, which are widely distributed in gram-positive bacteria. Conserved amino acids include the presumed active site of topoisomerase activity and four cysteine residues in the N-terminus of all Rep proteins compared. The repB gene is preceded by a sequence motif exhibiting substantial homology to the &quot;plus&quot; origins of this family of ss DNA plasmids and was shown to act as a &quot;hot spot&quot; for deletion formation in certain plasmid chimaeras. The compelling suggestion that pCB101 replicates via a rolling circle mechanism was substantiated by the demonstration of ss DNA replication intermediates in B. subtilis cells carrying a pCB101-derived plasmid.    Expression of the Bacillus subtilis recA gene is induced following DNA damage as well as during the development of the competent state. DNA damage-induction of the recA gene occurs by a RecA-dependent mechanism, whereas competence-induction occurs by a RecA-independent mechanism. To examine the molecular mechanisms that control the expression of the recA gene, a deletion analysis of the recA promoter region was performed. A regulatory region that is required for repression of recA expression was identified upstream of the recA promoter. Deletion of this regulatory region derepressed expression and abolished damage-induction of the recA promoter. Within this region are sequences similar to the consensus sequence that has been identified within DNA damage-inducible promoter regions of other B subtilis genes. Another regulatory region was identified that is required for the RecA-independent, competence-specific induction of the recA gene. Deletion of these sequences significantly reduced competence-induction of the recA promoter.    It is known that there is a strong similarity in amino acid sequence between the products of the Escherichia coli morphogenes ftsW (mra region at 2 min) and rodA (mrd region at 14 min) and the Bacillus subtilis SpoVE protein which is required for spore cortex formation. We show here that the predicted amino acid sequences coded for by the genes flanking spoVE are homologous to the products of the E coli genes murD and murG, which flank ftsW, and are involved in peptidoglycan biosynthesis. During vegetative growth and early stationary phase spoVE is cotranscribed with murD and murG in the form of very long polycistronic messages originating upstream of murD. However, this transcriptional activity is shut-off soon (approximately 1 h) after the cells enter stationary phase, and spoVE is then transcribed at two times during sporulation from its own promoter(s). Insertional in vitro mutagenesis of the region revealed that although murD and murG are essential for normal vegetative growth, spoVE is only required for sporulation: spoVE null mutants display a sporulation stage V phenotype indistinguishable by light microscopy from the phenotype conferred by the spoVE85 and spoVE153 alleles that originally defined the locus.    The spoIIA operon of Bacillus megaterium has been cloned and the nucleotide sequence determined. The spoIIA sequence contains three open reading frames coding for putative proteins of 116 aa, 147 aa, and 253 aa; the first and the third genes are preceded by a ribosomal binding site. The genes are in the same order as those of B subtilis and B licheniformis. The deduced amino acid sequences of these three open reading frames show 78-92% homology with SpoIIAA, SpoIIAB and SpoIIAC of B subtilis and B licheniformis. Northern hybridization revealed that B megaterium also has two spoIIA transcripts, 1.77 kb and 2.92 kb, attaining maximum expression at t1 and t3, respectively. In addition, homology to a possible penicillin binding protein gene upstream and the first part of a spoVA operon downstream has been identified on the 3.34-kb fragment. The spoIIA and the downstream spoVA promoter regions are highly conserved among these three species. Sequence analysis of the spoVA promoter revealed a region upstream to the -35 that is highly conserved across Bacillus species.    The spo0A gene product of Bacillus subtilis is a transcriptional regulator that is required for the initiation of sporulation. It has not been possible to isolate mutations that suppress the sporulation defect caused by spo0A null mutations. We describe the isolation and characterization of mutations that suppress the severe sporulation defect caused by a spo0A missense mutation (spo0A9V). Two suppressor mutations, spa2 and spa4, have been characterized in combination with, and separated from, the spo0A9V mutation. Both were located in the carboxyl half of Spo0A, in the putative DNA binding, transcriptional activation region. spa2 was in codon 174, causing a leucine to arginine change (spo0A174LR), and spa4 was in codon 162 (of 267), causing a histidine to arginine change (spo0A162HR). spa2 and spa4 significantly restored sporulation to the spo0A9V mutant, however, the appearance of heat resistant spores was delayed relative to wild-type. When separated from spo0A9V, that is, as single mutations in spo0A, spa4 caused a delay in sporulation, while spa2 allowed apparently normal sporulation. The spa mutations caused interesting phenotypes when combined with other early sporulation mutations. spa2 suppressed the sporulation defect caused by spo0E11. This was most easily seen in spo0E11 abrB double mutants, which had a much more severe sporulation defect than the spo0E11 single mutant. That is, spo0E11 and abrB mutations caused a synthetic (synergistic) sporulation phenotype. Both the spa2 spo0A9V and the spa4 spo0A9V alleles greatly enhanced the sporulation defect caused by mutations in spoIIJ, spo0J and spo0K. The significance of these synthetic sporulation defects is discussed.    The Bacillus subtilis intergenic suppressor mutations crsA and rvtA, previously shown to restore sporulation competence to a variety of strains containing stage 0 sporulation defects, also suppress lesions in the stage II sporulation genes spoIIF, spoIIN and spoIIJ. They do not rescue sporulation in other stage II through stage V sporulation mutations. Cells containing spoIIN, spoIIF96 and spoIIJ::Tn917 mutations fail to transcribe spoIID, a late stage II gene. Introduction of crsA47 into spoIINts279, spoIIF96, or spoIIJ::Tn917 mutant backgrounds circumvents the need for the spoIIF, IIN, and IIJ products, restoring both expression of spoIID, and sporulation competence.    The spoIIA operon codes for an alternative sigma factor which appears in the early stages of a sigma factor expression cascade during sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. We have used a single round in vitro transcription assay to probe requirements for transcription initiation at the spoIIA promoter. Core RNA polymerase or holoenzyme containing sigma A was reconstituted with sigma H protein and used to transcribe the spoIIA promoter. Formation of heparin resistant transcription initiation complexes required that the spoIIA template be supercoiled. Topoisomers of the spoIIA template were created and transcribed at various temperatures. Changes in the superhelicity of template DNA had a significant influence on the amount of transcription complexes formed at the spoIIA promoter.    The P2 promoter from Bacillus subtilis sigma-A (sigma A) operon and the strong phi 29 phage G3b promoter were used to study their interactions with free sigma A and with RNA polymerase holoenzymes (E sigma A and E sigma 70). No binding of free sigma A to the tested promoters was observed, suggesting that the B subtilis free sigma A does not bind promoter by itself for the initiation of RNA transcription. Different footprints of B subtilis RNA polymerase holoenzyme (E sigma A) on the P2 and G3b promoters were detected. The footprint on the P2 promoter is mainly in the -10 downstream region of the bottom strand (noncoding strand) DNA and limited on the top strand (coding strand), whereas the footprints on both strands of the G3b promoter are very clear. These results suggest that the footprint regions of RNA polymerase on a promoter and the strength of its binding to the promoter depend on the properties of the specific promoter DNA sequence. It also suggests that the -10 and its downstream regions are more important than the -35 region for the formation of the E sigma A-P2 promoter open complex. Footprints of B subtilis E sigma A and E coli E sigma 70 on the same G3b promoter are very similar on the top strand but different on the bottom strand, with the footprint being about 17 bases wider (-4 to +13) in the case of E coli E sigma 70. Since this region contains most of the bases involved in promoter DNA melting, we suggest that E coli and B subtilis RNA polymerases have different efficiency in forming the open complex with heterologous promoter DNA during initiation of transcription.    The Spo0A protein of Bacillus subtilis controls the onset of sporulation by regulating transcription of various genes in both positive and negative manners depending on the promoters affected. The expression of the spo0A gene occurs from two promoters (Pv,Ps), separated by 148 bp, and transcription switches from Pv to Ps early in the sporulation program. DNase I footprint analysis of the spo0A promoter region revealed three distinct sites of Spo0A binding: -4 to +19 relative to Pv, -17 to +1 relative to Ps, and a region between Pv and Ps. The Pv region and the region between the two promoters was sufficient for repression of Pv. Induction of Ps also required these regions which are upstream of -52 relative to Ps. Mutant Spo0A proteins containing asp----asn mutations at asp10 and asp56 were inactive in repression of the abrB promoter in vivo yet still retained DNA-binding activity. The results presented are consistent with a model in which the phosphorylated form of Spo0A acts directly at its promoters to achieve induction of Ps and repression of Pv. These effects at the spo0A promoter were independent of the presence of the major kinase, KinA.    The hbs operon of Bacillus subtilis comprises a single gene which is localized between the spoIVA and mtrA open reading frames, and is situated at 204 degrees of the standard map of B subtilis. Expression of hbs is initiated from two distinct promoters called P1 and P2. The transcription initiation sites have been mapped by primer extension analysis. Sequences upstream from P1 show a -35 and -10 region which may be recognized by the vegetative form of RNA polymerase E sigma A, whereas sequences upstream from P2 may be recognized by either E sigma C or E sigma H minor forms of RNA polymerase. In vegetative cells, hbs is highly and equally transcribed from both promoters, P1 and P2. In contrast, in sporulating cells, hbs is expressed predominantly from P2. In order to study the physiological role of HBsu, we must overcome our failure to interrupt the hbs gene within the B subtilis chromosome by using a previously constructed strain, BM19, bearing hbs under the control of the IPTG-inducible spac-1 promoter. In this strain, growth was found to depend highly on hbs expression. In the absence of IPTG, growth was strongly affected culminating in a filamentous cell morphology. Although sporulation in IPTG-uninduced BM19 cells was poor, due to the limited cell growth, the outgrowth of those spores was delayed by 1 h. In contrast, in the presence of IPTG, a condition that induces hbs expression, normal outgrowth of spores was observed. The proposed essentiality of the hbs gene product for growth and development in B subtilis may be attributed to its interaction with replication and transcription as a consequence of its facility to wrap DNA and to condense the chromosome into nucleosomelike structures. A comparative sequence analysis of HBsu with 18 homologous histonelike proteins of diverse origin demonstrated their high conservation throughout evolution.    The rrnB operon in Bacillus subtilis includes 21 tRNA genes downstream of the ribosomal genes. In addition to the dual promoters upstream of these ribosomal genes, a second promoter is found within the tRNA gene region. In this study, these two promoter regions were inserted before the lacZ gene and each was integrated as a single-copy into the B subtilis chromosome to examine their activity during sporulation. Both promoters exhibited similar strength and temporal downregulation from vegetative growth through t3 of sporulation. At t3, transcription from both promoters was approximately 20% of that in logarithmic growth. No obvious function of the second promoter is evident except to boost transcription of downstream genes. This function may be important because the ribosomal promoters of rrnB are weak relative to other ribosomal promoters. For instance, the rrnO promoters were much stronger than the rrnB ribosomal promoters and considerably more active at t3. Thus, all ribosomal promoters are not of the same strength nor are they transcriptionally downregulated to the same extent during sporulation. However, both the rRNA and tRNA promoters in the rrnB operon are similar in strength and downregulation.    Derivatives of the conjugative streptococcal plasmid pIP501 replicate stably in Bacillus subtilis. The region essential for replication of pIP501 has been narrowed down to a 2.2 kb DNA segment, the sequence of which has been determined. This region comprises two genes, copR and repR, proposed to be involved in copy control and replication. By in vitro and in vivo transcriptional analysis we characterized three active promoters, pI, pII and pIII within this region. A putative fourth promoter (pIV) was neither active in vitro nor in vivo. We showed that copR is transcribed from promoter pI while the repR gene is transcribed from promoter pII located just downstream of copR. The pII transcript encompasses a 329 nucleotide (nt) long leader sequence. A counter transcript that was complementary to a major part of this leader was found to originate from a third promoter pIII. The secondary structure of the counter transcript revealed several stem-loop regions. A regulatory function for this antisense RNA in the control of repR expression is proposed. Comparative analysis of the replication regions of pAM beta 1 and pSM19035 suggested a similar organization of transcriptional units, suggesting that an antisense RNA is produced by these plasmids also.    The Bacillus subtilis glucose starvation-inducible transcription units, gsiA and gsiB, were characterized by DNA sequencing, transcriptional mapping, mutational analysis, and expression in response to changes in environmental conditions. The gsiA operon was shown to consist of two genes, gsiAA and gsiAB, predicted to encode 44.9- and 4.8-kDa polypeptides, respectively. The gsiB locus contains a single cistron which encodes a protein of unusual structure; most of its amino acids are arranged in five highly conserved, tandemly repeated units of 20 amino acids. The 5&apos; ends of gsiA and gsiB mRNAs were located by primer extension analysis; their locations suggest that both are transcribed by RNA polymerase containing sigma A. Expression of both gsiA and gsiB was induced by starvation for glucose or phosphate or by addition of decoyinine, but only gsiA was induced by exhaustion of nutrient broth or by amino acid starvation. Regulation of gsiA expression was shown to be dependent upon the two-component signal transduction system ComP-ComA, which also controls expression of genetic competence genes. Mutations in mecA bypassed the dependency of gsiA expression on ComA. Disruption of gsiA relieved glucose repression of sporulation but did not otherwise interfere with sporulation, development of competence, motility, or glucose starvation survival. We propose that gsiA and gsiB are members of an adaptive pathway of genes whose products are involved in responses to nutrient deprivation other than sporulation.    The argC gene of Streptomyces clavuligerus encoding N-acetylglutamyl-phosphate reductase (AGPR) has been cloned by complementation of argC mutants Streptomyces lividans 1674 and Escherichia coli XC33. The gene is contained in an open reading frame of 1,023 nucleotides which encodes a protein of 340 amino acids with a deduced molecular mass of 35,224 Da. The argC gene is linked to argE, as shown by complementation of argE mutants of E. coli. Expression of argC from cloned DNA fragments carrying the gene leads to high levels of AGPR in wild-type S. lividans and in the argC mutant S. lividans 1674. Formation of AGPR is repressed by addition of arginine to the culture medium. The protein encoded by the argC gene is very similar to the AGPRs of Streptomyces coelicolor, Bacillus subtilis, and E. coli and, to a lesser degree, to the homologous enzymes of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Anabaena spp. A conserved PGCYPT domain present in all the AGPR sequences suggests that this may be the active center of the protein. Transformation of S. clavuligerus 328, an argC auxotroph deficient in clavulanic acid biosynthesis, with plasmid pULML30, carrying the cloned argC gene, restored both prototrophy and antibiotic production.    Seventeen cis-dominant mutations leading to riboflavin overproduction in Bacillus subtilis were localized to the region between nucleotides +37 and +159 relative to the transcription initiation site of the riboflavin operon. This region displays an unusual structure for regulatory sequences. The main part of it represents clusters of A/T and G/C-rich sequences that symmetrically blank a short inverted repeat.    The activation of additional promoter sites by production of an alternative sigma subunit for RNA polymerase is a common strategy for the coordinate regulation of gene expression. Many alternative sigma factors control genes for specialized, and often narrowly distributed, functions. For example, most of the alternative sigma factors in Bacillus subtilis control genes necessary for endospore formation. In contrast, the B. subtilis sigma D protein controls the expression of genes important for flagellar-based motility and chemotaxis, a form of locomotion very broadly distributed in the eubacteria. A homologous sigma factor, sigma F, controls a similar group of motility genes in the enteric bacteria. The conservation of both promoter specificity and genetic function in these two regulons allowed us to test the ability of a B. subtilis sigma factor to function within an Escherichia coli host. We demonstrate that expression of the B. subtilis sigD gene restores motility to an E. coli strain mutant in the fliA locus encoding the sigma F factor. This result suggests that the B. subtilis sigma D protein can bind to the E. coli core RNA polymerase to direct transcription initiation from at least four of the late operon promoters, thereby leading to the synthesis of flagellin, motor, and hook-associated proteins. Conversely, expression of sigma D protein in a normally chemotactic strain of E. coli (fliA+) leads to a hyperflagellated, nonchemotactic phenotype.    Transcription from some sporulation-specific promoters of Bacillus subtilis is dependent on synthesis of pro-sigma E and its conversion to sigma E by proteolysis. Certain mutations in the precursor region of sigE, the gene encoding pro-sigma E, apparently allow the mutant sigE products to be active as sigma factors without being proteolysed in the normal way.    Alternative transcription factor sigma B of Bacillus subtilis controls a stationary-phase regulon induced under growth conditions that do not favor sporulation. Little is known about the metabolic signals and protein factors regulating the activity of sigma B. The operon containing the sigma B structural gene has the gene order orfV-orfW-sigB-rsbX, and operon expression is autoregulated positively by sigma B and negatively by the rsbX product (rsbX = regulator of sigma B). To establish the roles of the orfV and orfW products, orfV and orfW null and missense mutations were constructed and tested for their effects on expression of the sigma B-dependent genes ctc and csbA. These mutations were tested in two contexts: in the first, the sigB operon was under control of its wild-type, sigma B-dependent promoter, and in the second, the sigB operon promoter was replaced by the inducible Pspac promoter. The principal findings are that (i) the orfV (now called rsbV) product is a positive regulator of sigma B-dependent gene expression; (ii) the orfW (now called rsbW) product is a negative regultor of such expression; (iii) sigma B is inactive during logarithmic growth unless the rsbW product is absent; (iv) the rsbX, rsbV, and rsbW products have a hierarchical order of action; and (v) both the rsbV and rsbW products appear to regulate sigma B activity posttranslationally. There are likely to be at least two routes by which information can enter the system to regulate sigma B: via the rsbX product, and via the rsbV and rsbW products.    Bacillus subtilis strains containing defects in the sporulation gene spoIIF (kinA), spoIIJ (kinA), or spoIIN (ftsA) cannot transcribe the sigma E-dependent gene spoIID. Results presented here and by other workers demonstrate that the spoIIF, spoIIJ, and spoIIN gene products control spoIID transcription indirectly by coordinating the induction of the spoIIGAB, spoIIE, and spoIIAC operons, which are required for sigma E synthesis and processing. Sporulation competence and spoIIGAB, spoIIE, and spoIIAC transcription were restored in spoIIF, spoIIJ, and spoIIN mutants by introduction of crsA47, a mutation in the major vegetative sigma factor sigma A. crsA mutations are known to restore sporulation in certain spo0 mutants. crsA suppression of kinA and ftsA mutations was achieved through inhibition of the transcription of sin, a gene involved in the selection between several post-exponential-phase cell states. A deletion of sin restored sporulation competence in spoIIF, spoIIJ, or spoIIN mutant strains. A sin deletion was also able to restore sporulation competence in the crsA suppressible stage 0 mutant spo0K141.    Sin is a Bacillus subtilis DNA-binding protein which is essential for competence, motility, and autolysin production but also, if expressed on a multicopy plasmid, is inhibitory to sporulation and alkaline protease synthesis. We have now examined the physiological role of Sin in sporulation and found that this protein specifically represses three stage II sporulation genes (spoIIA, spoIIE, and spoIIG) but not the earlier-acting stage 0 sporulation genes. sin loss-of-function mutations cause higher expression of stage II genes and result in a higher frequency of sporulation, in general. Sin binds to the upstream promoter region of spoIIA in vitro and may thus gate entry into sporulation by directly repressing the transcription of stage II genes. In vivo levels of Sin increase rather than decrease at the time of stage II gene induction, suggesting that posttranslational modification may play a role in downregulation of negative Sin function.    Digestion of phosphatidylinositol (PI) or glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors of membrane proteins on the external cell surface with exogenous PI-specific phospholipase C (PIPLC) from Bacillus thuringiensis was shown to transmit a signal into the thymocyte to modulate the TCR/CD3 complex-induced signal delivery for cell activation. This was demonstrated for very early protein tyrosine phosphorylation, early c-fos transcription and late DNA synthesis. For this effect preincubation of the cells with PIPLC was required, but there was no evidence of involvement of any soluble products released from the cell surface by PIPLC in the signaling, suggesting a crucial role of the membrane-bound counterpart (diacylglycerol or diradylglycerol) of the PI/GPI hydrolysate. A possible role for this accessory signal in the microorganism-linked control of the (diacylglycerol or diradylglycerol) of the PI/GPI hydrolysate. A possible role for this accessory signal in the microorganism-linked control of the T cell receptor function is discussed.    The arsenate, arsenite, and antimonite resistance region of the Staphylococcus xylosus plasmid pSX267 was subcloned in Staphylococcus carnosus. The sequenced DNA region revealed three consecutive open reading frames, named arsR, arsB, and arsC. Expression studies in Escherichia coli with the bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase-promoter system yielded three polypeptides with apparent molecular weights of 8,000, 35,000, and 15,000, which very likely correspond to ArsR, ArsB, and ArsC, respectively. ArsB was distinguished by its overall hydrophobic character, suggesting a membrane association. The arsenate, arsenite, and antimonite resistance was shown to be inducible by all three heavy metal ions. Inactivation of the first gene, arsR, resulted in constitutive expression of resistance. Similar results were obtained with transcriptional fusions of various portions of the ars genes with a lipase reporter gene, indicating a function of ArsR as a negative regulator of a putative promoter in front of arsR. The inactivation of arsR also resulted in reduction of resistance to arsenite and antimonite, while arsenate resistance was unaffected. The three ars genes conferred arsenite resistance in E. coli and arsenite as well as arsenate resistance in Bacillus subtilis.    Integration of the Bacillus subtilis lysA gene cloned on pLP1 plasmid, into the 250 degrees region of the chromosome of this microorganism was performed. Significant differences in the level and character of their expression were shown between lysA gene integrated into the chromosome and plasmid-borne genes. It is suggested that the expression of the lysA gene could be under control of a certain cis-acting factor which is able to promote transcription of the lysA gene and mediate gene specific regulation.    Using a gene probe of the Escherichia coli groEL gene, a 1.8-kb HindIII fragment of chromosomal DNA of Bacillus subtilis was cloned. Upstream sequences were isolated as a 3-kb PstI fragment. Sequencing of 2,525 bp revealed two open reading frames in the order groES groEL. Alignment of the GroES and GroEL proteins with those of eight other eubacteria revealed 50 to 65% and 72 to 84% sequence similarity, respectively. Primer extension studies revealed one potential transcription start site preceding the groESL operon (S) which was activated upon temperature upshift. Northern (RNA) analysis led to the detection of two mRNA species of 2.2 and 1.5 kb. RNA dot blot experiments revealed an at least 10-fold increase in the amount of specific mRNA from 0 to 5 min postinduction, remaining at this high level for 10 min and then decreasing. A 9-bp inverted repeat within the 5&apos; leader region of the mRNA might be involved in regulation of the heat shock response. By using PBS1 transduction, the groESL operon was mapped at about 342 degrees.    The sequence of the 10 N-terminal amino acids of a Bacillus subtilis protein that cross-reacts with antibody to Escherichia coli GroEL was used to design a set of degenerate oligonucleotide probes. These probes identified a clone which carries almost the entire groESL operon from a B. subtilis subgenomic library. By chromosomal walking, an additional fragment carrying the 3&apos; end of groESL and its flanking sequence was isolated. Sequence analysis revealed two open reading frames (ORFs) in the cloned DNA. The upstream ORF encodes a 10-kDa protein which has 47% amino acid identity with E. coli GroES. The downstream ORF encodes a 58-kDa protein which is 62% identical to E. coli GroEL. A 2.1-kb groESL mRNA from B. subtilis was detected independently by Northern (RNA) blot analyses with a groES- and a groEL-specific probe. This demonstrated that groES and groEL are in an operon. The groESL promoter was located by using a promoter-probing plasmid, and the apparent transcription start site was mapped by primer extension analysis. The same promoter is utilized under normal and heat shock conditions. This promoter has the same features as a typical sigma A promoter. A strain in which the groESL operon was under the control of the sucrose-inducible sacB promoter was created. With this strain, it was possible to show that both groES and groEL are essential genes under both normal and heat shock conditions.    The leucyl-tRNA synthetase gene (leuS) of Bacillus subtilis was cloned and sequenced. A mutation in the gene, leuS1, increases the transcription and expression of the ilv-leu operion, permitting monitoring of leuS alleles. The leuS1 mutation was mapped to 270 degrees on the chromosome. Sequence analysis showed that the mutation is a single-base substitution, possibly in a monocistronic operon. The leader mRNA predicted by the sequence would contain a number of possible secondary structures and a T box, a sequence observed upstream of leader mRNA terminators of Bacillus tRNA synthetases and the B. subtilis ilv-leu operon. The DNA of the B. subtilis leuS open reading frame is 48% identical to the leuS gene of Escherichia coli and is predicted to encode a polypeptide with 46% identity to the leucyl-tRNA synthetase of E. coli.    We used primer extension and mutational analysis to identify a promoter upstream of ilvB, the first gene in the ilv-leu operon of Bacillus subtilis. Between the promoter and ilvB, there is a 482-bp leader region which contains a sequence that resembles a factor-independent transcription terminator. In in vitro transcription experiments, 90% of transcripts initiated at the ilvB promoter ended at a site near this terminator. Primer extension analysis of RNA synthesized in vivo showed that the steady-state level of mRNA upstream of the terminator was twofold higher from cells limited for leucine than it was from cells grown with excess leucine. mRNA downstream of the terminator was 14-fold higher in cells limited for leucine than in cells grown with excess leucine. Measurement of mRNA degradation rates showed that the half-life of ilv-leu mRNA was the same when the cells were grown with or without leucine. These data demonstrate that the ilv-leu operon is regulated by transcription attenuation.    Sporulating cells of the gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis are partitioned into two cellular compartments called the mother cell and the forespore. Gene expression in the mother cell and the forespore is regulated differentially by the compartment-specific transcription factors sigma K and sigma G, respectively. Gene expression between the two compartments is also coordinated by a signal transduction pathway that couples the activation of sigma K (by processing of its inactive precursor pro-sigma K) in the mother cell to sigma G-directed gene expression in the forespore. To dissect the signal transduction pathway genetically, we previously isolated bypass of forespore mutations at loci called bofA and bofB that relieve the dependence of pro-sigma K processing on the action of sigma G. bofB mutations were previously shown to be allelic to the two-cistron sporulation operon spoIVF, which encodes the pro-sigma K-processing enzyme or its regulator. We now report that bofA mutations are located in a small open reading frame of 87 codons that encodes a putative integral membrane protein with three potential membrane-spanning domains. The possibility is discussed that BofA and the SpoIVF proteins form a heteromeric complex in the mother cell membrane that surrounds the forespore and that this complex mediates the intercompartmental coupling of pro-sigma K processing to events in the forespore.    The Bacillus subtilis dinR gene product is homologous to the LexA protein of Escherichia coli and regulates the expression of dinR and dinC. Using transcriptional fusions in the dinR and the recA genes, we have investigated the epistatic relationship between these two genes during the SOS response induced either by DNA damage or by competence. The results show that after DNA damage, induction of the expression of both recA and dinR is dependent on the activity of the DinR and RecA proteins. A RecA-dependent activity on DinR is proposed as the initial event in the induction of the SOS network. In contrast, the competence-related induction of dinR and recA appears to involve two distinct mechanisms. While one mechanism corresponds to the classical regulation of the SOS response, the other appears to involve an activating factor. Moreover, this factor is active in cells in which competence is prevented by a mutation in the regulatory gene comA.    The sacT gene which controls the sacPA operon of Bacillus subtilis encodes a polypeptide homologous to the B. subtilis SacY and the Escherichia coli BglG antiterminators. Expression of the sacT gene is shown to be constitutive. The DNA sequence upstream from sacP contains a palindromic sequence which functions as a transcriptional terminator. We have previously proposed that SacT acts as a transcriptional antiterminator, allowing transcription of the sacPA operon. In strains containing mutations inactivating ptsH or ptsI, the expression of sacPA and sacB is constitutive. In this work, we show that this constitutivity is due to a fully active SacY antiterminator. In the wild-type sacT+ strain or in the sacT30 mutant, SacT requires both enzyme I and HPr of the phosphotransferase system (PTS) for antitermination. It appears that the PTS exerts different effects on the sacB gene and the sacPA operon. The general proteins of the PTS are not required for the activity of SacY while they are necessary for SacT activity.    We characterized catabolite repression of the genes encoding xylose utilization in Bacillus megaterium. A transcriptional fusion of xylA encoding xylose isomerase to the spoVG-lacZ indicator gene on a plasmid with a temperature-sensitive origin of replication was constructed and efficiently used for single-copy replacement cloning in the B. megaterium chromosome starting from a single transformant. In the resulting strain, beta-galactosidase expression is 150-fold inducible by xylose and 14-fold repressed by glucose, showing that both regulatory effects occur at the level of transcription. Insertion of a kanamycin resistance gene into xylR encoding the xylose-dependent repressor leads to the loss of xylose-dependent regulation and to a small drop in the efficiency of glucose repression to eightfold. Deletion of 184 bp from the 5&apos; part of the xylA reading frame reduces glucose repression to only twofold. A potential glucose-responsive element in this region is discussed on the basis of sequence similarities to other glucose-repressed genes in Bacillus subtilis. The sequence including the glucose-responsive element is also necessary for repression exerted by the carbon sources fructose and mannitol. Their efficiencies of repression correlate to the growth rate of B. megaterium, as is typical for catabolite repression. Glycerol, ribose, and arabinose exert only a basal twofold repression of the xyl operon, which is independent of the presence of the cis-active glucose-responsive element within the xylA reading frame.    The Bacillus subtilis genes kinA (spoIIJ), spo0F, and spo0A encode components of the sporulation signal transduction pathway. Recent work has suggested that these genes are transcribed by a minor form of RNA polymerase, E sigma H (sigma H is the product of spo0H, another early sporulation gene). We directly tested this hypothesis by performing in vitro transcription assays with reconstituted E sigma H and a set of plasmids containing the kinA, spo0F, and spo0A promoter regions. We were able to obtain distinct transcripts of the expected sizes with all three genes by using linearized or supercoiled templates. Furthermore, primer extension experiments indicate that the transcription start sites for the three genes in vitro and in vivo are the same. In addition, we measured steady-state levels of kinA, spo0F, and spo0A mRNAs during growth in sporulation medium; all of them were increased at or near the beginning of the stationary phase.    The promoter region of the agarase gene (dagA) of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) is complex; it consists of four distinct promoters with different -10 and -35 regions. We report the isolation of a form of RNA polymerase that mediates transcription in vitro from the dagAp4 promoter. The core components of this RNA polymerase are associated with a polypeptide of c. 66 kDa; holoenzyme reconstitution experiments show that the 66 kDa polypeptide functions as a sigma factor that directs transcription from the dagAp4 and Bacillus subtilis veg promoters in vitro. Alignment of the DNA sequences of these two promoters shows that they have bases in common in the -10 and -35 regions and that these sequences are similar to those observed for the major RNA polymerases of other bacteria. N-terminal amino acid sequence analysis of the 66 kDa polypeptide revealed it to be the product of the hrdB gene. Previous experiments showed that the predicted amino acid sequence of the hrdB gene product is very similar to the major sigma factors of other bacteria and suggested that disruption of the hrdB gene is lethal. These observations together lead to the conclusion that we have isolated the major RNA polymerase of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2). We have developed an improved protocol for the renaturation of sigma factors that have been isolated by preparative sodium dodecyl sulphate/polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). This method involves renaturing the polypeptide in the presence of the bacterial chaperonin GroEL. We expect this protocol to find general application for renaturation of other polypeptides that have been subjected to SDS-PAGE.    By using an internal part of the dnaK gene from Bacillus megaterium as a probe, a 5.2-kb HindIII fragment of chromosomal DNA of Bacillus subtilis was cloned. Downstream sequences were isolated by in vivo chromosome walking. Sequencing of 5,085 bp revealed four open reading frames in the order orf39-grpE-dnaK-dnaJ. orf39 encodes a 39-kDa polypeptide of unknown biological function with no noticeable homology to any other protein within the data bases. Alignment of the GrpE protein with those of three other bacterial species revealed a low overall homology, but a higher homology restricted to two regions which might be involved in interactions with other proteins. Alignment of the DnaK protein with six bacterial DnaK polypeptides revealed that a contiguous region of 24 amino acids is absent from the DnaK proteins of all known gram-positive species. Primer extension studies revealed three potential transcription start sites, two preceding orf39 (S1 and S2) and a third one in front of grpE (S3). S2 and S3 were activated at a high temperature. Northern (RNA) analysis led to the detection of three mRNA species of 4.9, 2.6, and 1.5 kb. RNA dot blot experiments revealed an at-least-fivefold increase in the amount of specific mRNA from 0 to 5 min postinduction and then a rapid decrease. A transcriptional fusion between dnaK and the amyL reporter gene exhibited a slight increase in alpha-amylase activity after heat induction. A 9-bp inverted repeat was detected in front of the coding region of orf39. This inverted repeat is present in a number of other heat shock operons in other microorganisms ranging from cyanobacteria to mycobacteria. The biological property of this inverted repeat as a putative key element in the induction of heat shock genes is discussed. The dnaK locus was mapped at about 223 degrees on the B. subtilis genetic map.    The products of the ftsA and ftsZ genes play a major role in septum formation in Escherichia coli. Their homologues have been found in various bacterial species, such as Bacillus subtilis where they are involved in septation during vegetative growth as well as during sporulation, a developmental process that is initiated by the formation of an asymmetrically positioned septum. Transcription of the B. subtilis ftsAZ operon was studied during exponential growth and sporulation by monitoring beta-galactosidase synthesis in strains harboring fusions of the E. coli lacZ gene with various fragments of the ftsAZ regulatory region. Transcription of the ftsAZ operon was found to be controlled by three promoters which were mapped by primer extension and characterized by their temporal pattern of expression. Two of these promoters, P1 and P3, are dependent on sigma A, the major vegetative sigma factor, and are expressed mainly during growth. The third one, P2, is recognized by sigma H associated RNA polymerase and its activity increases three- to four-fold around the onset of sporulation. The post-exponential enhancement of P2-driven transcription is abolished in a spo0A mutant but partially restored in an abrB spo0A double mutant. After inactivation by oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis mutated copies of P1 and P2 were introduced into the chromosome upstream from the ftsAZ operon. Transformants could be obtained only when ftsAZ transcription was controlled by a combination of two intact promoters, neither P1, P2 nor P3 being essential for viability. The sporulation efficiency was found to be dependent on the level of transcription of ftsAZ, the absence of P2 still allowing 30% of the normal sporulation rate. Therefore the post-exponential burst of synthesis of the FtsA and FtsZ proteins is not an absolute requirement for the successful completion of the asymmetric septum.    Mutations at the aecA locus of Bacillus subtilis lead to derepression of the lysC operon, which encodes aspartokinase II, and analysis of three independent aecA mutations has shown them to be nucleotide substitutions in the lysC leader region (Y. Lu, N.Y. Chen and H. Paulus (1991) J. Gen. Microbiol. 137, 1135-1141). DNA sequence analysis of the lysC control region of nine other mutants with derepressed levels of aspartokinase II revealed each of the mutations to be associated with changes in one or a few nucleotide residues. The nucleotide substitutions were clustered at two sites in the lysC leader: in a region of imperfect dyad symmetry about 40 base pairs from the transcription start site, and in the open reading frame for a putative leader peptide, which starts about 40 residues further downstream. The effect of nucleotide substitutions at the two sites differed in that those at the upstream site gave twice the degree of derepression. A mutant with a small deletion in the leader peptide coding region potentially affecting RNA secondary structure also had a higher level of lysC derepression. These results suggest that the lysC leader region contains at least two cis-acting control sites that play important and perhaps independent roles in the repression of the lysC operon by lysine.    The region of the Bacillus subtilis 168 chromosome that contains the structural genes for the major vegetative cell autolysin, (N-acetyl-muramoyl-L-alanine amidase), and its modifier protein has been cloned. Insertional mutagenesis with integrative plasmids carrying small DNA fragments from this region has revealed that both genes are located on a 4 kb fragment; they are organised in one transcription unit, the modifier being transcribed first. Studies of derivatives in which either the amidase or the modifier or both proteins are inactivated have revealed that amidase-deficient strains are not affected in growth, cell separation, transformability or sporulation. Observed phenotypic differences were altered kinetics of, cell wall turn-over and a reduced rate of, autolysis of native cell wall preparations. A residual amidase activity, about 3% of that of the wild-type strain, was found in strains devoid of the major amidase. A new, distinct cell wall-bound protein, designated CWBP49&apos;, with the same molecular weight as the amidase, was identified in mutants devoid of the latter enzyme.    We have used the polymerase chain reaction to alter transcriptional and translational signals surrounding the hinfIM gene [encoding M.HinfI methyltransferase (MTase)] so as to achieve overexpression in Escherichia coli. The PCR-generated hinfIM gene was subcloned in a high-expression vector under control of the hybrid trp-lac promoter. In addition, the positive retroregulator stem-loop sequence derived from the crystal protein-encoding gene of Bacillus thuringiensis was inserted downstream from hinfIM. Using a similar approach, we have also constructed overproducer clones of a deletion mutant of M.HinfI MTase that has 97 amino acids from the C terminus deleted. The plasmid from the mutant clones is fully protected from HinfI restriction endonuclease digestion. It appears that the functional properties (the recognition and catalytic functions) are encoded within this mutant gene. The overproducer clones yield the wild type (wt) and the mutant enzymes to about 10% of total cellular protein upon induction with 1 mM IPTG. The wt M.HinfI and the mutant MTase were purified to near electrophoretic homogeneity by phosphocellulose, DEAE and gel chromatography. Their monomer sizes by SDS/polyacrylamide-gel electrophoresis are 43 kDa and 31 kDa, respectively, in good agreement with that predicted from the nucleotide sequence. DNA methylation experiments with purified enzymes using single-strand and double-strand M13mp18 DNA substrates indicate that while wt enzyme methylates both forms of DNA substrates, the mutant enzyme appears to preferentially methylate ss DNA substrate.    The spoIIE operon is a developmentally regulated transcription unit activated in the second hour of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. Its promoter has an unusual structure, containing sequences which conform perfectly to the consensus for vegetative promoters recognized by sigma A-associated RNA polymerase (E sigma A), but with a spacing of 21 bp between the apparent -10 and -35 elements instead of the 17- or 18-bp spacing typical of promoters utilized by E sigma A. Mutations introduced into the apparent -10 element affected transcription in a manner consistent with its functioning as a polymerase recognition sequence. The deleterious effect of one -10 mutation was also suppressed in an allele-specific manner by a mutation in sigA known to suppress analogous -10 mutations in conventional vegetative promoters recognized by E sigma A. Similar suppression experiments failed to provide evidence for a direct interaction between E sigma A and the &quot;-35-like&quot; element, however, and DNase I protection experiments suggested instead that the Spo0A protein binds to a site overlapping this -35-like hexamer. Moreover, the effects of mutations within the -35-like hexamer on the binding of Spo0A in vitro paralleled their effects on transcription in vivo. We suggest that spoIIE belongs to a class of early-intermediate sporulation genes whose transcription by E sigma A is activated by the Spo0A protein.    A gene of Bacillus brevis HPD31 analogous to the Escherichia coli lon gene has been cloned and characterized. The cloned gene (B. brevis lon gene) encodes a polypeptide of 779 amino acids with a molecular weight of 87,400 which resembles E. coli protease La, the lon gene product. Fifty-two percent of the amino acid residues of the two polypeptides were identical. The ATP-binding sequences found in E. coli protease La were highly conserved. The promoter of the B. brevis lon gene resembled that recognized by the major RNA polymerase of Bacillus subtilis and did not contain sequences homologous to the E. coli heat shock promoters. The B. brevis lon gene was inactivated by insertion of the neomycin resistance gene. A mutant B. brevis carrying the inactivated lon gene showed diminished ability for the degradation of abnormal polypeptides synthesized in the presence of puromycin.    mtrA of Bacillus subtilis was shown to be the structural gene for GTP cyclohydrolase I, an enzyme essential for folic acid biosynthesis. mtrA is the first gene in a bicistronic operon that includes mtrB, a gene involved in transcriptional attenuation control of the trp genes. mtrA of B. subtilis encodes a 20-kDa polypeptide that is 50% identical to rat GTP cyclohydrolase I. Increased GTP cyclohydrolase I activity was readily detected in crude extracts of B. subtilis and Escherichia coli in which MtrA was overproduced. Biochemical evidence indicating that MtrA catalyzes dihydroneopterin triphosphate and formic acid formation from guanosine triphosphate is presented. It was also shown that mtrB of B. subtilis encodes a 6-kDa polypeptide. Expression of mtrB is sufficient for transcriptional attenuation control of the B. subtilis trp gene cluster in Escherichia coli. Known interrelationships between genes involved in folic acid and aromatic amino acid biosynthesis in B. subtilis are described.    Restriction fragments containing the 16S rRNA gene of the western aster yellow mycoplasmalike organism (SAY-MLO) were identified in Southern blots probed with cloned fragments of the western X-disease mycoplasmalike organism 16S rRNA gene. Two fragments which contained the entire SAY-MLO 16S rRNA gene and flanking DNA were cloned in M13 and sequenced. The SAY-MLO 16S rRNA gene is approximately 1,535 bp long, has a G+C content of 47 mol%, and has an overall secondary structure similar to that proposed for Escherichia coli. Putative rRNA promoter sequences and sequences involved in processing of the primary rRNA transcript were similar in the SAY-MLO, two Mycoplasma species, and Bacillus subtilis, suggesting that these prokaryotes and the mycoplasmalike organisms may have similar transcriptional and processing enzymes. We identified two tRNA genes, a tRNA(Tyr) (GTA) gene upstream from the 16S rRNA gene and a tRNA(Ile) (GAT) gene in the spacer region between the 16S and 23S rRNA genes. Comparisons of the SAY-MLO 16S rRNA nucleotide sequence with 16S rRNA sequences of other organisms indicated that the SAY-MLO is phylogenetically related most closely to other plant-pathogenic mycoplasmalike organisms, followed by Anaeroplasma species, Acholeplasma species, and some Mycoplasma species.    DNA in spores of Bacillus and Clostridium species is associated with small, acid-soluble proteins (SASP) of the alpha/beta type; the presence of these proteins is a major factor in causing spore resistance to UV light, alpha/beta-type SASP did not bind to single-stranded DNA, single- or double-stranded RNA, or DNA-RNA hybrids in vitro. However, these proteins bound a variety of double-stranded DNAs and conferred protection against DNase cleavage. The binding of alpha/beta-type SASP to DNA saturated at a protein/DNA ratio (wt/wt) of 4:1 to 5:1, which is approximately 1 SASP per 4 bp. alpha/beta-type SASP-DNA interaction did not require divalent cations, was independent of pH between 6 and 8, and, for some SASP-DNA pairs, was relatively insensitive to salt up to 0.3 M. The relative affinity of alpha/beta-type SASP for different DNAs was poly(dG).poly(dC) greater than poly(dG-dC).poly(dG-dC) greater than plasmid pUC19 greater than poly(dA-dT).poly(dA-dT), with poly(dA).poly(dT) giving no detectable binding. This order in alpha/beta-type SASP-DNA affinities parallels the facility with which the DNAs adopt an A-like conformation, the conformation in alpha/beta-type SASP-DNA complexes. An oligo(dG).oligo(dC) of 12 bp was bound by alpha/beta-type SASP. While a 26-bp oligo(dG).oligo(dC) bound more tightly than the 12-mer, there was no significant increase in affinity for alpha/beta-type SASP with further increase in size of oligo(dG).oligo(dC). In contrast, binding of alpha/beta-type SASP to oligo(dA-dT).oligo(dA-dT) was minimal up to at least a 70-mer, and binding to poly(dA-dT).poly(dA-dT) was very cooperative. In addition to blocking DNase digestion, binding of alpha/beta-type SASP to DNA blocked (i) cleavage of the DNA backbone by hydroxyl radicals and orthophenanthroline-Cu2+, (ii) DNA cleavage by restriction enzymes, in particular those with specificity for GC-rich sequences; and (iii) in vitro transcription of some but not all genes. However, methylation of dG residues by dimethyl sulfate was not affected by alpha/beta-type SASP binding.    The gene (sod) encoding Bacillus caldotenax (BC) Mn-superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) has been cloned in Escherichia coli and its entire nucleotide sequence determined. Within the coding region of the gene there were 21 nucleotide differences to the previously sequenced sod of Bacillus stearothermophilus (BS). The predicted amino acid sequence of BCMnSOD had two amino acid dissimilarities to the BSMnSOD, containing Asp and Val at positions 13 and 188, respectively, compared to Glu and Ile at the respective equivalent positions of BSMnSOD. Recombinant BCMnSOD was shown to be functionally active in E. coli, both in vitro and in vivo, and was produced at levels representing over 40% of the cells&apos; soluble protein by coupling sod transcription to the E. coli trp promoter. The sequenced region of DNA was also found to encompass part of a second open-reading frame, of unknown function, previously noted 3&apos; to the B. stearothermophilus gene.    The bacteriophage P1 cloning system can package and propagate DNA inserts that are up to 95 kilobases. Clones are maintained in Escherichia coli by a low-copy replicon in the P1 cloning vector and can be amplified by inducing a second replicon in the vector with isopropyl beta-D-thiogalactopyranoside. To overcome the necessity of screening clones for DNA inserts, we have developed a P1 vector with a positive selection system that is based on the properties of the sacB gene from Bacillus amyloliquefaciens. Expression of that gene kills E. coli cells that are grown in the presence of sucrose. In the new P1 vector (pAd10sacBII) sacB expression is regulated by a synthetic E. coli promoter that also contains a P1 C1 repressor binding site. A unique BamHI cloning site is located between the promoter and the sacB structural gene. Cloning DNA fragments into the BamHI site interrupts sacB expression and permits growth of plasmid-containing cells in the presence of sucrose. We have also bordered the BamHI site with unique rare-cutting restriction sites Not I, Sal I, and Sfi I and with T7 and Sp6 promoter sequences to facilitate characterization and analysis of P1 clones. We describe here the use of Not I digestion to size the cloned DNA fragments and RNA probes to identify the ends of those fragments. The positive selection P1 vector provides a 65- to 75-fold discrimination of P1 clones that contain inserts from those that do not. It therefore permits generation of genomic libraries that are much easier to use for gene isolation and genome mapping than are our previous libraries. Also, the new vector makes it feasible to generate P1 libraries from small amounts of genomic insert DNA, such as from sorted chromosomes.    In a previous publication (Wen, L.-P., Ruettinger, R. T., and Fulco, A.J. (1989) J. Biol. Chem. 264, 10996-11003), we reported that about 1 kilobase of 5&apos; flanking sequence was required for barbiturate-inducible expression of the cytochrome P450BM-3 gene in Bacillus megaterium. We have now found, by analysis of various deletion and frameshift derivatives of this region, that an open reading frame immediately upstream of the B. megaterium cytochrome P450BM-3 structural gene encodes a protein, designated Bm3R1, which negatively controls the expression of the P450BM-3 gene at the transcriptional level. A helix-turn-helix DNA binding motif was found near the N-terminal portion of Bm3R1 protein. The 5&apos; terminus of the bm3R1 transcript generated in vivo was determined by nuclease S1 mapping and primer extension analysis to be 44 base pairs upstream of the translation initiation sequence GTG of bm3R1. A putative promoter sequence with a high degree of similarity to the -35 and -10 consensus sequence recognized by the Bacillus subtilis sigma-43 factor was located at an appropriate distance from the transcription start site. A B. megaterium mutant which highly constitutively produced P450BM-3 protein was isolated and complementation of this cytochrome P450BM-3-constitutive mutant by a DNA fragment containing the wild-type bm3R1 gene indicated that the mutation in this locus was trans-dominant. Sequence analysis of the bm3R1 gene and its upstream region from this mutant, after amplification by the polymerase chain reaction, identified a single base change that resulted in a glycine to glutamate substitution in the beta-turn region of the DNA binding motif. By placing the bm3R1 gene under the control of a tac promoter and changing the translation initiation sequence from GTG to ATG, we succeeded in overproducing the Bm3R1 protein in Escherichia coli. A 20-bp perfect palindromic putative operator site, located between the presumed promoter sequences and the bm3R1 structural gene, was defined both by in vivo titration of Bm3R1 repressor and by gel mobility shift assays using the cell-free extracts containing the overproduced wild-type or mutant Bm3R1 protein. The barbiturate effect in mediating the induction of cytochrome P450BM-3 appears to be indirect but probably involves, in part, the release of inhibition by Bm3R1 repressor protein by interfering with its binding to the palindromic putative operator sequence and perhaps to other sites on the regulatory region of the gene encoding cytochrome P450BM-3.    Packaging of Bacillus subtilis phage SPP1 DNA into viral capsids is initiated at a specific DNA site termed pac. Using an in vivo assay for pac cleavage, we show that initiation of DNA synthesis and DNA packaging are uncoupled. When the DNA products of pac cleavage were analyzed, we could detect the pac end that was destined to be packaged, but we failed to detect the other end of the cleavage reaction. SPP1 conditional lethal mutants, which map adjacent to pac, were analyzed with our assay. This revealed that the products of gene 1 and gene 2 are essential for pac cleavage. SPP1 mutants that are affected in the genes necessary for viral capsid formation (gene 41) or involved in headful cleavage (gene 6) remain proficient in pac site cleavage. Analysis of the nucleotide sequence (2.769 x 10(3) base-pairs) of the region of the genes required for pac cleavage revealed five presumptive genes. We have assigned gene 1 and gene 2 to two of these open reading frames (orf), giving the gene order gene 1-gene 2-orf 3-orf 4-orf 5. The direction of transcription of the gene 1 to orf 5 operon and the length of the mRNAs was determined. We have identified, upstream from gene 1, the major transcriptional start point (P1). Transcription originating from P1 requires a phage-encoded factor for activity. The organization of gene 1 and gene 2 of SPP1 resembles the organization of genes in the pac/cos region of different Escherichia coli double-stranded DNA phages. We propose that the conserved gene organization is representative of the packaging machinery of a primordial packaging system.    One of the most intriguing questions posed by bacterial spore formation concerns the establishment of cell-specific gene expression in the prespore and mother cell. Recent results now suggest that sigma factors, in addition to their temporal roles in the control of gene expression, may also be the key determinants of differential gene expression during sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. The genes encoding two sporulation-specific sigma factors, sigma E and sigma F, are expressed soon after the initiation of sporulation, before the formation of the spore septum that separates the prespore and mother cell compartments. It now appears that sigma E and sigma F direct transcription only after septation and then in a specific cell type, suggesting that the segregation of the sigma activities after septation is a key event in the establishment of differential gene expression. The mechanism responsible for this segregation is complex, involving at least seven other gene products. We discuss possible models for the interactions between the sigma factors and the establishment of cell-specific transcription.    The sfp gene is required for cells of Bacillus subtilis to become producers of the lipopeptide antibiotic surfactin. sfp was isolated and its nucleotide sequence was determined. sfp was expressed in Escherichia coli and its putative product was purified for use in antibody production and in amino acid sequence analysis. The gene was plasmid-amplified in B. subtilis, where it conferred a Srf+ phenotype on sfp0 (surfactin non-producing) cells. Overproduction of Sfp in B. subtilis did not cause production of an increased amount of surfactin and resulted in the repression of a lacZ transcriptional fusion of the srfA operon, which encodes enzymes that catalyze surfactin synthesis. We propose that sfp represents an essential component of peptide synthesis systems and also plays a role, either directly or indirectly, in the regulation of surfactin biosynthesis gene expression.    The sigma subunit of bacterial RNA polymerase is required for specific binding of the enzyme to promoters. This specificity is probably directed by two regions of most sigma factors that make sequence-specific contacts at two regions of promoters, the -10 and -35 regions. We found that a single amino acid substitution in the -10 recognition region of sigma E from Bacillus subtilis trapped RNA polymerase in a stable complex with promoter DNA in which it was unable to initiate transcription. Our results are consistent with the view that promoter utilization by RNA polymerase proceeds through several intermediate steps and suggest that the -10 recognition region of sigma factors may participate in a step that follows initial promoter binding.    The spoIIG promoter is used by RNA polymerase containing sigma A (E sigma A), the primary form of RNA polymerase found in vegetative cells in Bacillus subtilis. However, the spoIIG promoter is active only after the onset of sporulation. Activation of the spoIIG promoter requires the product of the spo0A gene (Spo0A). Spo0A is a sequence-specific DNA-binding protein which binds to two sites in the spoIIG promoter that are essential for promoter activity. We found that single-base-pair substitutions in these two regions that reduced promoter activity in vivo caused reduced binding of Spo0A in vitro, and one substitution that increased promoter activity in vivo increased the affinity of Spo0A for this DNA in vitro. Furthermore, Spo0A stimulated transcription from the spoIIG promoter by E sigma A in vitro. These results support the model that binding of Spo0A activates E sigma A-dependent transcription from the spoIIG promoter after the onset of sporulation.    The neutral proteinase gene of Bacillus cereus was cloned. Its restriction map and the direction of transcription was determined. It was shown that the neutral proteinase gene could be expressed in Bacillus cells. The thermostability of the product coded by the neutral proteinase gene and its natural analogue was explored. The obtained data indicate that the neutral proteinase of Bacillus cereus is closely related to the enzyme of Bacillus amyloliquefaciens by these parameters. It was found that the neutral proteinase of Bacillus cereus has a high sensitivity to autolysis and that leads to the decrease in the enzymes concentration in the cultural medium at the late stages of cell growth. But the possibility of stabilization the neutral proteinase by Ca2+ ions has been demonstrated.    The nucleotide sequence of the Clostridium thermocellum gene licB, coding for a thermoactive beta-1,3-1,4-glucanase, has been determined. The gene is located downstream, but in opposite orientation to the beta-glucosidase gene bglA. A coding region of 1002 bp is flanked by canonical promoter and transcription terminator sequences. The primary translation product of the licB gene has a predicted molecular mass of 37,896 Da. The protein sequence can be divided into several discrete segments: an N-terminal signal peptide, a catalytic region, a segment rich in Pro and Thr residues and a C-terminal reiterated domain. The catalytic region shows close similarity to lichenases of bacilli (52-58% identity) and Fibrobacter succinogenes (35% identity), but is unrelated to barley beta-1,3-1,4-glucanases. It consists of two domains, which in the case of the F. succinogenes lichenase are arranged in reversed order to that of C. thermocellum and Bacillus lichenases. The C-terminal reiterated domain of C. thermocellum lichenase is homologous to the duplicated non-catalytic domain of endo-beta-1,4-glucanases and xylanase Z from the same organism. This domain is considered a characteristic feature of clostridial cellulases organized as multienzyme complex (cellulosome). The beta-1,3-1,4-glucanase encoded by the licB gene might therefore be an additional enzyme component of the C. thermocellum cellulosome.    Sporulation in Bacillus subtilis is a model for how cells of one type generate other differentiated cell types. During sporulation two cellular compartments arise that differ from each other and from the progenitor cell. Differential gene expression between the two is governed by the successive appearance of four transcription factors whose activities are coordinated in crisscross fashion between the two cells.    Sequence analysis upstream from the subtilin structural gene (spaS) in Bacillus subtilis ATCC 6633 revealed several open reading frames, SpaB, SpaC, and SpaD. SpaB, consisting of 599 amino acid residues, shows excellent homology with a variety of membrane translocator proteins, such as HlyB from Escherichia coli and some mammalian multidrug resistance proteins. When the spaB gene was interrupted by integration of a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene, the ability of the cell to produce subtilin, as determined by a halo assay, was lost. The homology of SpaB to translocator proteins, including transmembrane and ATP-binding regions, suggests that SpaB may play a role in subtilin secretion. The SpaB open reading frame overlaps with another open reading frame called SpaC, and the possibility that the SpaB and SpaC proteins become fused by frameshifting is considered. Regions of homology between SpaD (177 residues) and HlyD were also found, suggesting that SpaD may participate with SpaB in translocation of subtilin through the membrane. Although no readily interpretable homologies to SpaC (442 residues) were found, its sequence suggests that it is membrane associated. The absence of rho-independent transcription terminators between these open reading frames suggests that they are all part of the same operon.    The Bacillus subtilis tyrS gene, which encodes tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase (TyrTS), was isolated, and its nucleotide sequence was determined. The cloned gene was shown to complement an Escherichia coli tyrS (Ts) mutant. The predicted amino acid sequence exhibited 70% identity to that of Bacillus stearothermophilus TyrTS and 55% identity to that of E. coli TyrTS, while identity to a second cryptic B. subtilis TyrTS gene, designated tyrZ, was only 27%. Primer extension analysis indicated that tyrS transcription initiated at a vegetative promoter sequence located 300 nucleotides upstream of the AUG start codon. The mRNA leader region was found to contain an inverted repeat sequence resembling a transcriptional terminator. Expression of a transcriptional tyrS-lacZ fusion was found to be induced by starvation for tyrosine in a tyrosine auxotroph (tyrA1). Transcription initiation was unaffected by tyrosine starvation. Deletion of the terminator region in a tyrS-lacZ fusion resulted in high-level constitutive expression. Immediately preceding the putative terminator was sequence element found to be conserved in the upstream region of a number of Bacillus tRNA synthetase genes as well as in the ilv-leu biosynthetic operon; mutation of this element in tyrS resulted in low-level uninducible expression. The conservation of this sequence element suggests that aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase genes and the ilv-leu operon may be regulated by a common mechanism in Bacillus spp.    The prfA gene of Listeria monocytogenes was recently reported to be required for expression of hly, which encodes a pore-forming hemolysin essential for pathogenicity (M. Leimeister-Wachter, C. Haffner, E. Domann, W. Goebel, and T. Chakraborty, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 87:8336-8340, 1990). We demonstrate here that a hly-lacZ fusion introduced into Bacillus subtilis is strongly activated when the prfA gene product is supplied in trans under the control of an isopropyl-beta-D-thiogalactopyranoside-inducible promoter, Pspac. Moreover, the PrfA-dependent activation of hly is abolished by point mutations in a 14-bp DNA palindromic sequence present in the 5&apos; upstream region of hly. This indicates that PrfA is both necessary and sufficient for hly transcriptional activation and establishes the palindrome as the likely target sequence for PrfA interaction. The presence of a palindrome in the upstream regions of three additional L. monocytogenes genes clustered near hly suggests that PrfA may serve as a transcriptional activator for a major virulence regulon of L. monocytogenes. In addition, the ability of PrfA to activate its target promoters effectively in B. subtilis suggests that further analysis of this regulon and perhaps other aspects of L. monocytogenes gene regulation might be carried out in part through reconstruction experiments in B. subtilis.    The phytopathogenic bacterium Erwinia chrysanthemi, unlike other members of the family Enterobacteriaceae, is able to metabolize the beta-glucosides, arbutin, and salicin. A previous genetic analysis of the E. chrysanthemi arb genes, which mediate beta-glucoside metabolism, suggested that they were homologous to the Escherichia coli K-12 bgl genes. We have now determined the nucleotide sequence of a 5,065-bp DNA fragment containing three genes, arbG, arbF, and arbB. Deletion analysis, expression in minicell systems, and comparison with sequences of other proteins suggest that arbF and arbB encode a beta-glucoside-specific phosphotransferase system-dependent permease and a phospho-beta-glucosidase, respectively. The ArbF amino acid sequence shares 55% identity with that of the E. coli BglF permease and contains most residues thought to be important for a phosphotransferase. One change, however, was noted, since BglF Arg-625, presumably involved in phosphoryl transfer, was replaced by a Cys residue in ArbF. An analysis of the ArbB sequence led to the definition of a protein family which contained enzymes classified as phospho-beta-glucosidases, phospho-beta-galactosidases, beta-glucosidases, and beta-galactosidases and originating from gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, archebacteria, and mammals, including humans. An analysis of this family allowed us (i) to speculate on the ways that these enzymes evolved, (ii) to identify a glutamate residue likely to be a key amino acid in the catalytic activity of each protein, and (iii) to predict that domain II of the human lactate-phlorizin hydrolase, which is involved in lactose intolerance, is catalytically nonactive. A comparison between the untranslated regions of the E. chrysanthemi arb cluster and the E. coli bgl operon revealed the conservation of two regions which, in the latter, are known to terminate transcription under noninducing conditions and be the target of the BglG transcriptional antiterminator under inducing conditions. ArbG was found to share a high level of similarity with the BglG antiterminator as well as with Bacillus subtilis SacT and SacY antiterminators, suggesting that ArbG functions as an antiterminator in regulating the expression of the E. chrysanthemi arb genes.    The sigB operon of Bacillus subtilis encodes sigma B and three additional open reading frames (orfV, orfW, and orfX). Having previously mapped several mutations that alter the induction pattern of a sigma B-dependent promoter (ctc) to regions of cloned B. subtilis DNA which contain these three open reading frames, we directly tested the regulatory potential of orfV, orfW, and orfX by creating null alleles of each of these genes and examining the effects of the mutations, either singly or in pairs, on transcription of ctc and the sigB operon. Using lacZ reporter gene fusions and Northern (RNA) blot analyses, we have determined that all three genes modulate the activation of the sigma B-dependent promoters at both the sigB operon and ctc. Our data are consistent with the three gene products participating in a single pathway of negative control. orfW and orfX single-mutant strains have high levels of sigB and ctc transcription. sigB and ctc transcription in an orfV strain is similar to that found in mutant strains which lack sigma B itself. The orfV mutation is dominant to orfX but recessive to orfW. These results suggest that OrfW is the primary inhibitor of sigma B-dependent transcription and that OrfV is capable of counteracting the negative control of OrfW but is prevented from doing this by the orfX gene product.    An early step in sporulation of the bacterium Bacillus subtilis, is the formation of two compartments in the developing sporangium: the mother cell and the forespore. These compartments differ in their programs of gene expression and developmental fate. The establishment of cell type within this simple developmental program, is accomplished by the compartmentalization of sigma subunits of RNA polymerase. The localization of these sigma factors results in compartment-specific gene expression. Recent experiments have elucidated some of the early steps in the establishment of cell type. After septum formation, the activity of the sigma factor, sigma F, is confined to the forespore compartment. This, in turn, results in the localized expression of another developmental sigma factor, sigma G. The forespore localization of these two sigma factors, establishes the forespore line of gene expression. sigma F and sigma G also regulate mother cell events. sigma F activity in the forespore regulates the proteolytic processing of sigma E within the mother cell compartment. The localization sigma E activity leads to mother cell expression of another sigma factor, pro-sigma K. The proteolytic processing of pro-sigma K to mature sigma K is controlled by the forespore sigma factor, sigma G. Mature sigma K then directs the transcription of mother cell specific genes. Therefore, the initial localization of sigma F activity to the forespore compartment, orchestrates the establishment of cell type in both forespore and mother cell compartments.    In vivo dimethyl sulfate footprinting of the Bacillus subtilis glnRA regulatory region under repressing and derepressing conditions demonstrated that the GlnR protein, encoded by glnR, interacts with two sites situated within and adjacent to the glnRA promoter. One site, glnRAo1, between positions -40 and -60 relative to the start point of transcription, is a 21-bp symmetrical element that has been identified as essential for glnRA regulation (H. J. Schreier, C. A. Rostkowski, J. F. Nomellini, and K. D. Hirschi, J. Mol. Biol. 220:241-253, 1991). The second site, glnRAo2, is a quasisymmetrical element having partial homology to glnRAo1 and is located within the promoter between positions -17 and -37. The symmetry and extent of modifications observed for each site during repression and derepression indicated that GlnR interacts with the glnRA regulatory region by binding to both sites in approximately the same manner. Experiments using potassium permanganate to probe open complex formation by RNA polymerase demonstrated that transcriptional initiation is inhibited by GlnR. Furthermore, distortion of the DNA helix within glnRAo2 occurred upon GlnR binding. While glutamine synthetase, encoded by glnA, has been implicated in controlling glnRA expression, analyses with dimethyl sulfate and potassium permanganate ruled out a role for glutamine synthetase in directly influencing transcription by binding to operator and promoter regions. Our results suggested that inhibition of transcription from the glnRA promoter involves GlnR occupancy at both glnRAo1 and glnRAo2. In addition, modification of bases within the glnRAo2 operator indicated that control of glnRA expression under nitrogen-limiting (derepressing) conditions included the involvement of a factor(s) other than GlnR.    The double-stranded DNA copy corresponding to the 5&apos;-nontranslated alpha beta-leader of potato virus X (PVX) genomic RNA (positions -3 to-85 according to AUG initiator) was chemically synthesized and fused to the transcription plasmids containing three different reporter genes: neomycinphosphotransferase type II (NPT II) gene, Bacillus thuringiensis coleopteran-specific toxic protein gene and beta-glucuronidase (GUS) gene. Expression of the reporter genes in vitro and in plant protoplasts (in the case of GUS gene) reveals that the alpha beta-leader of PVX RNA acts as a translation enhancer despite the presence of the upstream vector-derived sequence and irrespective of the length of the spacer sequence preceding the reporter genes.    The behavior of the major vegetative cell RNA polymerase of Bacillus subtilis, E sigma A, during initiation of transcription was compared to that of its Escherichia coli counterpart, E sigma 70, at several promoters known to be actively transcribed by both RNA polymerases. Challenge experiments using heparin, restriction endonucleases, and competing promoter DNA under various conditions showed that, at several promoters, complexes with B. subtilis RNA polymerase formed in the absence of nucleoside triphosphates were unstable. These complexes produced DNase I footprints that were less extended than those produced by the E. coli enzyme at the same promoters. Further, in the presence of certain combinations of nucleoside triphosphates, conditions that allow production of abortive oligonucleotides, these B. subtilis RNA polymerase complexes remained dissociable. Thus, at these promoters, the B. subtilis enzyme interacted with the DNA and reached a catalytically active initial transcribing complex without becoming committed to the template. At these same promoters, E. coli RNA polymerase formed stable open complexes before forming any phosphodiester bonds. B. subtilis initial transcribing complexes also remained sensitive to the drug rifampicin until a later stage in the initiation process than did the corresponding E. coli complexes. At one promoter, B. subtilis E sigma A and E. coli E sigma 70 behaved similarly, forming stable open complexes in the absence of any nucleoside triphosphates.    We report the cloning and characterization of the Bacillus subtilis sporulation locus spoIVA, mutations at which cause an unusual defect in spore formation in which the coat misassembles as swirls within the mother cell. We show that spoIVA is a single gene of 492 codons that is capable of encoding a polypeptide of 55 kDa. Transcription of spoIVA is induced at about the second hour of sporulation by the regulatory protein sigma E from two closely spaced promoters designated P1 and P2. Experiments in which the upstream promoter P1 was removed show that transcription of spoIVA from P2 is sufficient for efficient spore formation. Based on these and other findings, we infer that the spoIVA gene product is a morphogenetic protein; we discuss its role in the deposition of coat polypeptides around the developing forespore.    Escherichia coli purB encodes adenylosuccinate lyase (ASL), the enzyme that catalyzes step 8 in the pathway for de novo synthesis of IMP and also the final reaction in the two-step sequence from IMP to AMP. Gene purB was cloned and found to encode an ASL protein of 435 amino acids having a calculated molecular weight of 49,225. E. coli ASL is homologous to the corresponding enzymes from Bacillus subtilis and chickens and also to fumarase from B. subtilis. Gene phoP is 232 bp downstream of purB. Gene purB is regulated threefold by the purine pool and purR. Transcriptional regulation of purB involves binding of the purine repressor to the 16-bp conserved pur regulon operator. The purB operator is 224 bp downstream of the transcription start site and overlaps codons 62 to 67 in the protein-coding sequence.    The present review focuses on phage 2C, a member of a family of virulent phages that multiply in Bacillus subtilis. The best known members of this group are SPO1, phi e, H1, 2C, SP8, and SP82, the genomes of which are made of double-stranded DNA of about 150 kilobase pairs (kbp). The two DNA strands have different buoyant densities. Moreover, thymine (T) is completely replaced by hydroxymethyluracil (hmUra). Comparison of the phage DNAs has shown that both base substitutions and deletions have contributed to the evolution of their genomes. In addition, all of the hmUra-phage genomes contain colinear redundant ends, amounting to 10% of total bases. Two lines of evidence suggest that the redundant ends of 2C DNA, in spite of extensive homology, contain unique sequences. Further studies focused on DNA replication during the lytic cycle. The semiconservative replication of the infecting viral genome is followed by extensive recombination. At the level of replication forks, viral DNA synthesis is discontinuous on both strands during the whole cycle. Deoxythymidinetriphosphate, required for viral DNA synthesis in permeabilized infected bacteria, was incorporated in small amounts into phage DNA. The putative primary origin of replication has been cloned and localized on the viral genome. Some viral promoters have been successfully cloned in Escherichia coli. These sequences, however, did not promote transcription in B. subtilis. The abnormal base might be required for promoter activity in the natural host.    Temporally and environmentally regulated gene expression in prokaryotes occurs primarily at the level of transcription initiation. Two main modes of regulation have been described, including either the binding of a repressor that blocks transcription or the interaction of a positive regulator with the transcription complex, leading to transcription initiation. Several classes can be distinguished among positive regulators according to their mechanisms of action. This review describes the different types of positive regulators identified in Bacillus subtilis, a gram-positive bacterium. These include accessory regulatory polypeptides, classical positive regulators that bind to target sites located just upstream from the promoter, ambiactive regulators that can act both positively and negatively, antiterminators, two-component signal transduction systems, and positive regulators associated with specific secondary sigma factors.    By using primer extension analysis, we located the transcription start point of the acetoacetate decarboxylase (adc) gene of Clostridium acetobutylicum 90 nucleotides upstream from the initiation codon with A as the first transcribed nucleotide. From this site the promoter structure TTTACT(18 bp)TATAAT was identified; it shows high homology to the consensus sequences of gram-positive bacteria and Escherichia coli. Northern blot experiments revealed a length of 850 bases for the transcript of the adc gene. It thus represents a monocistronic operon. Transcription of adc was induced by conditions necessary for the onset of solvent formation. Induction occurred long before the respective fermentation product (acetone) could be detected in the medium. Transcription of the operon containing the genes for acetoacetyl coenzyme A:acetate/butyrate:coenzyme A transferase (designated ctf) downstream of the adc gene but divergently transcribed is also induced by conditions necessary for the onset of solvent formation. The length of the respective RNA transcript, 4.1 kb, indicates additional coding capacity, since the genes for the two subunits of the coenzyme A transferase cover only approximately 1.5 kb. No distinct transcripts for the other open reading frames of the adc gene region, ORF1 and ORF2, could be detected. Computer analysis indicated that ORF1, which showed significant similarity to the alpha-amylase gene of Bacillus subtilis (U. Gerischer and P. Durre, J. Bacteriol. 172:6907-6918, 1990), probably is indeed a coding region. ORF2, however, does not seem to have a coding function.    The restriction endonuclease (R.BsuFI) of Bacillus subtilis recognizes the target DNA sequence 5&apos; CCGG. The R.BsuFI gene was found in close proximity to the cognate M.BsuFI gene, which had previously been characterized (1). Cloning of the R.BsuFI gene in E.coli was only possible with the M.BsuFI Mtase gene present on a compatible plasmid. The cloned R.BsuFI gene was expressed in E. coli and restriction activity was observed in vivo and in vitro. The R.BsuFI gene consists of 1185 bp, coding for a protein of 395 amino acids with a calculated molecular weight of 45.6 kD. The R.BsuFI enzyme was purified to homogeneity following overexpression. It presumably works as a dimer and cleaves the 5&apos; CCGG target sequence between the two cytosines to produce sticky ends with 5&apos; CG overhangs, like the isoschizomers R.MspI and R.HpaII. The relatedness between R.BsuFI and R.MspI is reflected by significant similarities of the amino acid sequences of both enzymes. This is the first case where such similarities have been observed between isoschizomeric restriction endonucleases which belong to 5mC specific R/M systems. This observation suggests that R.BsuFI and R.MspI genes derive from a common ancestor. In spite of such functional and evolutionary relatedness, the R/M systems differ in the arrangement of their R and M genes. In the BsuFI system transcription of the two genes is convergent, whereas divergent transcription occurs in the MspI system.    The transcription from the spoVG promoter of Bacillus subtilis is induced at the start of the stationary phase of growth and is dependent on the expression of the spoOA, spoOB, and spoOH genes. It is repressed in cells grown in the presence of excess glucose and glutamine and is under the negative control of the abrB gene. The spoOA and spoOB gene products function to suppress the negative control exerted by abrB. Transcription initiation requires the form of RNA polymerase holoenzyme that contains the spoOH gene product, sigma H. Optimal transcription also requires an upstream A-T-rich region termed the upstream activating sequence (UAS). The mechanism of UAS function was examined through mutational analysis of the spoVG promoter region. Deletion of the UAS or positioning the UAS one half turn or one full turn of the DNA helix upstream of its location in wild-type spoVG resulted in a severe reduction in promoter activity. Deletion of most of the UAS abolished the abrB-dependent repression of spoVG transcription. Higher activity was observed when the UAS was inserted 10 bp (one turn of the helix) upstream than when the sequence was repositioned either 5 or 13 bp upstream. Sequences upstream of the UAS were found not to be involved with the position-dependent function of the UAS. Positioning the UAS 42 or 116 bp upstream eliminated the stimulatory effect of the sequence on spoVG transcription. These data indicate that the UAS functions effectively when it is in close proximity to the -35 region.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    The cryIB gene of Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. thuringiensis HD-2 codes for a Mr 139492 protein that is lethal to certain lepidopteran larvae. We used primer extension to map transcriptional initiation sites and found that cryIB was transcribed from two sites that are activated at different times during sporulation. The presumed promoter regions for the two start sites are very similar to the two promoters preceding the cryIA (a) gene, and the in vivo transcriptional start sites were found to be identical. Variable amounts of the full-length cryIB protein were detected by immunoblotting of extracts of recombinant cells of Escherichia coli; larger amounts were found when the TTG translational start codon was changed to ATG and when an htpR- strain of E. coli was used as the recipient for transformation. When expressed in E. coli, the cryIB protein was found to be toxic to the larvae of Artogeia rapae (LC50 of 58 ng/cm2) and exhibited little toxicity to the larvae of Manduca sexta (LC50 greater than 5000 ng/cm2).    The expression of the chloramphenicol-inducible chloramphenicol-acetyltransferase gene (cat), encoded on Staphylococcus aureus plasmid pUB112, is regulated via a translational attenuation mechanism. Ribosomes, which are arrested by chloramphenicol during synthesis of a short leader peptide, activate catmRNA translation by opening a 5&apos;-located stem-loop structure, thus setting free the cat ribosome-binding site. We have determined the 5&apos; and 3&apos; ends of catmRNA and analysed its stability in Bacillus subtilis. In the absence of the antibiotic, the half-life of catmRNA is shorter than 0.5 min; it is enhanced to about 8 min by sub-inhibitory concentrations of the drug. No decay intermediates of catmRNA could be detected, indicating a very fast degradation after an initial rate-limiting step. ochre nonsense mutations in the 5&apos; region of the cat structural gene, which eliminate catmRNA translation, did not affect its chloramphenicol-induced stabilization. Mutations in the leader-peptide coding region, which abolish ribosome stalling and, therefore, cat gene induction, also eliminate catmRNA stabilization. We conclude that catmRNA is stabilized on induction by a chloramphenicol-arrested ribosome, which physically protects a nuclease-sensitive target site in the 5&apos; region of catmRNA against exo- or endonucleolytic initiation of degradation. This protection is analogous to ermA and ermC mRNA and seems to reflect a general mechanism for stabilization of mRNA derived from inducible antibiotic resistance genes in B. subtilis.    The Bacillus subtilis glpD gene encodes glycerol-3-phosphate (G3P) dehydrogenase. A sigma A type promoter and the transcriptional startpoint for glpD were identified. Between the transcriptional startpoint and glpD there is an inverted repeat followed by a run of T residues. The inverted repeat prevents expression of a reporter gene, xylE, when positioned between this gene and a constitutive promoter. Expression of xylE, like expression of glpD, is induced by G3P and repressed by glucose. Induction also requires the product of the glpP gene. Our results suggest that glpD expression is controlled by antitermination of transcription. The inverted repeat appears to be a target for induction by G3P and GlpP. We speculate that glucose repression is mediated via an inhibitory effect on synthesis or activity of GlpP.    Synthesis of bacterial flagella and the accompanying array of chemotaxis receptors and transducers represents a major commitment of energy and resources for a growing bacterial cell and is subject to numerous levels of regulation. Genes for flagellar and chemotaxis proteins are expressed in a complex transcriptional cascade. This regulatory hierarchy acts to ensure that the highly expressed filament structural protein, flagellin, is synthesized only after a prerequisite set of structural proteins has been expressed and properly assembled. Recent evidence suggests that many bacteria utilize an alternative sigma (sigma) subunit, similar in specificity to the Bacillus subtilis sigma 28 protein, to direct transcription of flagellin, chemotaxis and motility genes. In Caulobacter crescentus and Campylobacter spp., both a sigma 54-like factor and a sigma 28-like factor participate in the transcription of flagellar and chemotaxis genes. Conversely, a sigma 28-like factor controls non-motility functions in at least one non-flagellated organism.    The genes involved in biotin synthesis have recently been isolated from Bacillus sphaericus [Gloeckler et al., Gene 87 (1990) 63-70]. Sequence analysis revealed that they are organized into two gene clusters, designated bioXWF and bioDAYB. The 5&apos;-noncoding region of the bioD locus fused to the xylE reporter gene was inserted into the Gram-positive pUB110 replicon and the resulting plasmid was introduced into B. sphaericus IFO3525. Transformants expressed the xylE gene only if the biotin concentration in the growth medium remained below 50 ng/ml. After mutagenesis, colonies were screened for their ability to express the chromogenic marker in the presence of an excess of biotin. Most of these mutants escaped biotin repression of xylE gene expression. Classical genetic analysis showed they formed two main categories: chromosomal mutations, pleiotropically acting in trans on both bioXWF and bioDAYB 5&apos;-noncoding regions, in which a 15-bp region common to both promoters represented a hot-spot for the second class of plasmid-associated mutations. These results, completed by the identification of transcription start points for the bioD and bioX genes, strongly suggest that this 15-bp sequence overlaps the site of a biotin-mediated negative regulation circuit controlling the transcription of the bio genes.    Translational lacZ fusions to forespore genes of Bacillus subtilis were not expressed in spoIIAC (sigma F) or spoIIIE mutants when the lacZ fusions were integrated at the loci of the same genes or at the SP beta locus. However, some of these genes, including gerA, gpr, spoIIIG (sigma G), and sspE, were expressed in spoIIIE mutants and spoIIIE spoIIIG double mutants (but not in spoIIAC mutants) when the lacZ fusions were integrated at the amyE locus. When tested, the beta-galactosidase made in these mutants was found only in the forespore, and the 5&apos; ends of the mRNAs produced in these mutants were identical to those in a Spo+ background. Analysis of the in vitro transcription of forespore genes by RNA polymerase containing sigma F (E sigma F) revealed a direct correlation between good in vitro transcription by E sigma F and expression at the amyE locus in spoIIIE mutants. This result suggests that forespore genes are transcribed by E sigma F in spoIIIE and spoIIIE spoIIIG mutants. Comparison of the promoter regions of genes transcribed well and poorly by E sigma F in vivo and in vitro showed that good transcription by E sigma F was correlated with G residues at positions -15 and -16, a purine residue at position -13, and a T residue at position -7 relative to the start site of transcription. The importance of these residues in sigma F recognition was confirmed by analysis of the E sigma F-dependent transcription in vivo and in vitro of mutant ssp genes.    We describe a general, in vivo method for identifying Bacillus subtilis genes controlled by specific, nonessential regulatory factors. We establish the use of this approach by identifying, isolating, and characterizing a gene dependent on sigma B, an alternate transcription factor which is found early in stationary phase but which is not essential for sporulation. The method relies on two features: (i) a plate transformation technique to introduce a null mutation into the regulatory gene of interest and (ii) random transcriptional fusions to a reporter gene to monitor gene expression in the presence and absence of a functional regulatory product. We applied this genetic approach to isolate genes comprising the sigma B regulon. We screened a random Tn917lacZ library for fusions that required an intact sigma B structural gene (sigB) for greatest expression, converting the library strains from wild-type sigB+ to sigB delta::cat directly on plates selective for chloramphenicol resistance. We isolated one such fusion, csbA::Tn917lacZ (csb for controlled by sigma B), which mapped between hisA and degSU on the B. subtilis chromosome. We cloned the region surrounding the insertion, identified the csbA reading frame containing the transposon, and found that this frame encoded a predicted 76-residue product which was extremely hydrophobic and highly basic. Primer extension and promoter activity experiments identified a sigma B-dependent promoter 83 bp upstream of the csbA coding sequence. A weaker, tandem, sigma A-like promoter was likewise identified 28 bp upstream of csbA. The csbA fusion was maximally expressed during early stationary phase in cells grown in Luria broth containing 5% glucose and 0.2% glutamine. This timing of expression and medium dependence were very similar to those for ctc, the only other recognized gene dependent on sigma B.    Previously, we isolated and characterized six Bacillus subtilis ada mutants that were hypersensitive to methylnitroso compounds and deficient in the adaptive response to alkylation. Cloning of the DNA complementing the defects revealed the presence of an ada operon consisting of two tandem and partially overlapping genes, adaA and adaB. The two genes encoded proteins with methylphosphotriester-DNA methyltransferase and O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase activities, respectively. To locate the six mutations, the ada operon was divided into five overlapping regions of about 350 bp. The fragments of each region were amplified by polymerase chain reaction and analyzed by gel electrophoresis to detect single-strand conformation polymorphism. Nucleotide sequences of the fragments exhibiting mobility shifts were determined. Three of the mutants carried sequence alterations in the adaA gene: the adaA1 and adaA2 mutants had a one-base deletion and insertion, respectively, and the adaA5 mutant had a substitution of two consecutive bases causing changes of two amino acid residues next to the presumptive alkyl-accepting Cys-85 residue. Three mutants carried sequence alterations in the adaB gene: the adaB3 mutant contained a rearrangement, the adaB6 mutant contained a base substitution causing a change of the presumptive alkyl-accepting Cys-141 to Tyr, and the adaB4 mutant contained a base substitution changing Leu-167 to Pro. The adaB mutants produced ada transcripts upon treatment with low doses of alkylating agents, whereas the adaA mutant did not. We conclude that the AdaA protein functions as the transcriptional activator of this operon, while the AdaB protein specializes in repair of alkylated residues in DNA.    During sporulation in Bacillus subtilis, new RNA polymerase sigma factors are produced. These sigma factors direct the transcription of genes that are required for this cellular differentiation. In order to determine the role of each sigma factor in this process, it is necessary to know which promoters are recognized by each sigma factor. The spoIIID gene product plays an important role in the establishment of mother cell-specific gene expression during sporulation. We found that substitution of an alanine at position 124 of the sporulation-specific sigma factor sigma E suppressed the effect of a single-base-pair transition at position -13 of the spoIIID promoter. This alanine substitution in sigma E did not suppress the effect of a transversion at position -12 of the spoIIID promoter. The allele specificity of the interaction between sigma E and the spoIIID promoter is strong evidence that sigma E directs transcription from the spoIIID promoter during sporulation. Position 124 in sigma E is located within a region that is highly conserved among the regions in other sigma factors that probably interact with the -10 regions of their cognate promoters.    The gene (sod) encoding Bacillus stearothermophilus Mn-superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) has been cloned in Escherichia coli and its entire nucleotide sequence determined. With the exception of the post-translationally cleaved N-terminal methionine residue, the predicted amino acid sequence exhibits complete identity to the previously determined amino acid sequence. The recombinant MnSOD was shown to be functionally active in E. coli both in vitro and in vivo, and was expressed to 49% of the soluble cell protein by coupling its transcription to the E. coli trp promoter. The sequenced region of DNA was also found to encompass a second open reading frame. The putative encoded polypeptide exhibited no significant primary sequence homology to any currently characterised protein.    Immunoelectron microscopy was used to visualize the expression of a gene under the control of developmental transcription factor sigma E during spore formation in Bacillus subtilis. sigma E is generated by cleavage of an inactive proprotein (pro-sigma E) shortly after the formation of the sporulation septum, which partitions the sporangium into mother-cell and forespore compartments. Specific antibodies and gold-conjugated secondary antibodies were used to localize beta-galactosidase in thin sections of sporangia from cells bearing a lacZ transcriptional fusion to a gene (spoIID) under the direct control of sigma E. Transcription of spoIID was found to be induced shortly after the formation of the sporulation septum and was largely confined to the mother cell. Cell-type-specific transcription of genes under the control of sigma E could be responsible for establishing the mother-cell line of gene expression.    srfA is an operon needed for the development of genetic competence in Bacillus subtilis. This operon is normally expressed at a low level during growth, and its transcription increases sharply just before the transition to stationary phase. The genetic requirements for the full expression of srfA were previously examined in several laboratories and shown to include spo0A, spo0H, spo0K, comQ, and comA. In the present study these results were confirmed with an isogenic set of strains. We have also shown that comP is needed for srfA expression but that other regulatory genes required for competence (degU, sin, and abrB) are not needed for the expression of srfA. We have used the expression of srfA under control of the regulatable Pspac promoter to study the kinetics of competence development and to determine whether the genes ordinarily required for expression of srfA are needed for any additional roles during the development of competence. When expression of srfA was driven from Pspac, competence was expressed constitutively throughout growth. Furthermore, when srfA was expressed from Pspac, the spo0K, comQ, comP, and comA determinants were no longer required for the expression of competence. We conclude therefore that the multiple signals which trigger the initiation of competence development in relation to growth stage are ordinarily received prior to the increase in srfA expression. We propose that these signals are mediated by the products of spo0K, comQ, comP, and comA, resulting in the phosphorylation of ComA by ComP.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    During an early stage of endospore formation in Bacillus subtilis, the cell divides asymmetrically into two compartments that follow different developmental paths. The differential expression of genes in these two compartments is controlled in part by the production of compartment-specific transcription factors, sigma G and sigma K. It is not known how sigma G accumulation is restricted to one of the two compartments, the forespore. However, the observations that sigma F directs transcription of the structural gene for sigma G and that sigma F activity can be modified by the product of a gene, spoIIAB, has led us to investigate the role of spoIIAB during sporulation. We have isolated mutants that carry deletion alleles of spoIIAB. Electron microscopic examination of these mutants revealed that these mutations blocked endospore formation at an early stage before septation and caused extensive cell lysis. The spoIIAB deletion alleles caused hyperexpression of genes that are normally expressed exclusively in the forespore compartments of sporulating wild-type cells, whereas these alleles reduced expression of other genes, including spoIIE, which is expressed before septation in wild-type cells. These observations confirm that spoIIAB is essential for sporulation and are consistent with models in which the product of spoIIAB plays a role in regulating the timing and/or compartment specificity of sigma F- and sigma G-directed transcription.    The sigA operon of Bacillus subtilis is transcribed from at least two SigA and two SigH promoters. Primer extension and promoter probe analyses have localized a fifth promoter, P5, that is active only at later sporulation stages (T3 to T5). Mutations in the genes for the sigma factors SigG, SigK, SigH, and SigE do not block transcription from P5. The expression from P5 is blocked or severely reduced in spo0A, spo0B, spo0E, and spo0K mutants.    Binding of phage phi 29 regulatory protein p4 to its target sequences produces a strong bend in the DNA that is important for activation of the late A3 promoter (PA3). Protein p4 binding site in PA3 overlaps with the divergently transcribed main early promoter. PA2b, which suggested that p4 could also act as a repressor. We show that protein p4 both excludes Bacillus subtilis sigma A-RNA polymerase from PA2b and directs it to the divergently transcribed A3 promoter. Although steric hindrance is likely to be involved in the repression process, we have also analysed the effect on PA2b activity of a sequence-dependent curvature that simulates that induced by protein p4. A progressive increase in the DNA curvature of protein p4 binding region, performed by site-directed mutagenesis, has indicated that a static DNA curvature by itself can inhibit transcription from PA2b, both by impairing the binding of sigma A-RNA polymerase to the promoter and by reducing its ability to form transcriptionally active open complexes. These results indicate that bending promoter sequences in a direction unfavourable for RNA polymerase binding can repress transcription. Protein p4-induced DNA bending could therefore participate in PA2b repression by producing a DNA structure not recognized as a promoter by sigma A-RNA polymerase.    The complete nucleotide sequence of the hrdB gene, an essential gene of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2), indicates the presence of an open reading frame encoding a putative polypeptide of 442 amino acid (aa) residues with an Mr of 48,412. The principal sigma-like transcriptional factor of S. coelicolor (HrdB) protein showed an extensive aa sequence homology with the known principal sigma factors of Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Myxococcus xanthus. The degree of sequence similarity between HrdB protein and the known principal sigma factors was distinct from that observed between the principal sigma factors and the alternative (minor) sigma factors. Essentially all of the functional domains proposed for the principal sigma factor of E. coli were conserved in HrdB protein. The putative sigma factor, HrdB, like that of B. subtilis had a short internal nonconserved region, which might be characteristic of Gram+ species.    Early in the process of spore formation in Bacillus subtilis a septum is formed that partitions the sporangium into daughter cells called the forespore and the mother cell. The daughter cells each have their own chromosome but follow dissimilar programs of gene expression. Differential gene expression in the forespore is now shown to be established by the compartmentalized activity of the transcription factor sigma F. The sigma F factor is produced prior to septation, but is active only in the forespore compartment of the post-septation sporangium. The sigma F factor is controlled by the products of sporulation operons spoIIA and spoIIE, which may be responsible for confining its activity to one of the daughter cells.    During the process of endospore formation in Bacillus subtilis the appearance of the mother-cell transcription factor sigma K by conversion from its inactive precursor pro-sigma K is coupled to events under the control of the forespore transcription factor sigma G. This intercompartmental coupling is believed to be mediated by the products of a sporulation locus called spoI V F because certain bypass-of-forespore (bof) mutations that map at the spoI V F locus relieve the dependence of pro-sigma K processing on the action of sigma G in the forespore. We now report that spoI V F is a two-cistron operon whose transcription is under the control of the sporulation transcription factor sigma E and whose products are likely to be integral membrane proteins. We show that the products of both the promoter-proximal (spoI V F A) and promoter-distal (spoI V F B) cistrons are required for spore formation at 37 degrees C, but that the spoI V F A gene product is dispensable at 30 degrees C. The bypass-of-forespore mutations are located at the extreme 3&apos; end of the spoI V F A cistron, one such mutation causing a proline to serine substitution eight residues from the COOH terminus of SpoIVFA and another (a nonsense mutation) causing the absence of the terminal six amino acid residues of the protein. We also show that at a permissive temperature for spore formation spoI V F A null mutants exhibit a bypass-of-forespore phenotype. We hypothesize that SpoIVFA functions positively in stabilizing SpoIVFB, which we propose is thermolabile in the absence of the promoter-proximal gene product, and negatively in inhibiting the action of SpoIVFB. A model for intercompartmental coupling is presented in which SpoIVFB promotes pro-sigma K processing in response to a signal from the forespore that relieves or otherwise counteracts the inhibitory effect of SpoIVFA on SpoIVFB.    The levanase operon in Bacillus subtilis is expressed from a -12, -24 promoter and transcription is stimulated by the regulator LevR, which contains a domain homologous with the central domain of the NifA and NtrC family of regulators. We isolated mutants defective in the expression of the levanase operon. These strains contain mutations that define a gene, called sigL, located between cysB and sacB on the genetic map. The sigL gene was cloned and sequenced. It encodes a polypeptide containing 436 residues with a molecular weight of 49,644. The amino acid sequence of SigL is homologous with all sigma 54 factors from Gram-negative bacteria, including Rhizobium meliloti (32% identity) and Klebsiella pneumoniae (30% identity). B. subtilis sigL mutants have a pleiotropic phenotype: (i) the transcription of the levanase operon is strongly reduced and (ii) in minimal medium lacking ammonia, sigL mutants cannot grow when arginine, ornithine, isoleucine, or valine is the sole nitrogen source. These results indicate that the sigL gene encodes an equivalent of the sigma 54 factor in B. subtilis, to our knowledge, the first of this type to be identified in Gram-positive bacteria.    Transcription factor 1 (TF1) is the Bacillus subtilis phage SPO1-encoded member of the family of DNA-binding proteins that includes Escherichia coli HU and integration host factor, IHF. A gel electrophoretic retardation method has been used to show that a TF1 dimer binding to one of its preferred sites in (5-hydroxymethyl)uracil (hmUra)-containing DNA sharply bends the latter. In fact, the DNA-bending properties of TF1 and E. coli IHF are indistinguishable. Substitutions at amino acid 61 in the DNA-binding &quot;arm&quot; of TF1 are known to affect DNA-binding affinity and site selectivity. Experiments described here show that these substitutions also affect DNA bending. The selectivity of TF1 binding is very greatly diminished and the affinity is reduced when hmUra is replaced in DNA by thymine (T). An extension of the gel retardation method that permits an analysis of DNA bending by non-specifically bound TF1 is proposed. Under the assumptions of this analysis, the reduced affinity of TF1 for T-containing DNA is shown to be associated with bending that is still sharp. The analysis of the TF1-DNA interaction has also been extended by hydroxyl radical (.OH) and methylation interference footprinting at two DNA sites. At each of these sites, and on each strand, TF1 strongly protects three segments of DNA from attack by OH. Patches of protected DNA are centered approximately ten base-pairs apart and fall on one side of the B-helix. Methylation in either the major or minor groove in the central ten base-pairs of the two TF1 binding sites quantitatively diminishes, but does not abolish, TF1 binding. We propose that multiple protein contacts allow DNA to wrap around the relatively small TF1 dimer, considerably deforming the DNA B-helix in the process.    The Bacillus subtilis xyl operon encoding enzymes for xylose utilization is repressed in the absence of xylose and in the presence of glucose. Transcriptional fusions of spoVG-lacZ to this operon show regulation of beta-galactosidase expression by glucose, indicating that glucose repression operates at the level of transcription. A similar result is obtained when glucose is replaced by glycerol, thus defining a general catabolite repression mechanism. A deletion of xylR, which encodes the xylose-sensitive repressor of the operon, does not affect glucose repression. The cis element mediating glucose repression was identified by Bal31 deletion analysis. It is confined to a 34 bp segment located at position +125 downstream of the xyl promoter in the coding sequence for xylose isomerase. Cloning of this segment in the opposite orientation leads to reduced catabolite repression. The homology of this element to various proposed consensus sequences for catabolite repression in B. subtilis is discussed.    The start sites for transcription and translation of a Bacillus subtilis spore coat protein gene, cotT, were determined. The CotT protein was synthesized as a 10.1-kDa precursor which was processed to a coat polypeptide of 7.8 kDa. Insertional inactivation of the cotT gene resulted in spores with an altered appearance of the inner coat layers and slow germination in response to a germination solution containing fructose, glucose, and asparagine. Rates of germination in L-alanine and in Penassay broth were the same as that of the wild type. A strain containing the cotT gene on a low-copy-number plasmid produced spores with an excess of CotT precursor and a thickening of the striated inner coat. These spores responded poorly to all of the germinants mentioned above. A site-directed mutation of the codon at the processing site of CotT resulted in the accumulation of the precursor in sporulating cells and on the spores, but there was no effect on the germination rates or solvent resistance of these spores. Both the lack and the overproduction of CotT led to subtle alterations in the structure of the inner spore coat and in the capacity of spores to respond to particular germinants.    The prt1 gene encoding extracellular protease from Erwinia carotovora subsp. carotovora EC14 in cosmid pCA7 was subcloned to create plasmid pSK1. The partial nucleotide sequence of the insert in pSK1 (1,878 bp) revealed a 1,041-bp open reading frame (ORF1) that correlated with protease activity in deletion mutants. ORF1 encodes a polypeptide of 347 amino acids with a calculated molecular mass of 38,826 Da. Escherichia coli transformed with pSK1 or pSK23, a subclone of pSK1, produces a protease (Prt1) intracellularly with a molecular mass of 38 kDa and a pI of 4.8. Prt1 activity was inhibited by phenanthroline, suggesting that it is a metalloprotease. The prt1 promoter was localized between 173 and 1,173 bp upstream of ORF1 by constructing transcriptional lacZ fusions. Primer extension identified the prt1 transcription start site 205 bp upstream of ORF1. The deduced amino acid sequence of ORF1 showed significant sequence identity to metalloproteases from Bacillus thermoproteolyticus (thermolysin), B. subtilis (neutral protease), Legionella pneumophila (metalloprotease), and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (elastase). It has less sequence similarity to metalloproteases from Serratia marcescens and Erwinia chrysanthemi. Locations for three zinc ligands and the active site for E. carotovora subsp. carotovora protease were predicted from thermolysin.    Differentiation in Bacillus subtilis involves the formation of specialized cell types called the mother cell and the forespore. These differ from each other and from their parent in developmental fate. Establishment of the two cell types and their subsequent differentiation is governed by the compartmentalized action of six developmental transcription factors.    The genes encoding the enzymes of IMP biosynthesis in Bacillus subtilis constitute the pur operon, whereas the genes encoding GMP biosynthetic enzymes, guaA (GMP synthetase) and guaB (IMP dehydrogenase), and the purA gene encoding adenylosuccinate (sAMP) synthetase all occur as single units. The purB gene encodes an enzyme involved in both IMP and AMP biosynthesis and is located in the pur operon. The levels of purine biosynthetic enzymes (except for GMP synthetase) were repressed in cells grown in the presence of purine compounds. Transcription of the pur operon is regulated negatively by adenine and guanine compounds. Our results suggest that ATP and guanine (or hypoxanthine) act as low molecular mass repressors. The level of IMP dehydrogenase was repressed by guanosine, but not in the presence of adenine, and was negatively correlated with the GTP/ATP pools ratio. The level of sAMP synthetase was repressed by adenine and increased by guanosine, and was positively correlated with the GTP/ATP pools ratio. It appears that the mode of regulating purine biosynthetic enzyme levels coincides with the cellular need for the individual enzymes.    Recent advances in DNA technology have made it possible to analyse the structure and function of the replication origin region of the chromosomes of various bacteria. Comparative studies have shown that 2 basic elements, the replicator and initiator, involved in initiation of chromosome replication are common to most eubacteria but with differences in the fine organization of these elements. In this article, we first review studies of the structural analysis of the origin regions of bacterial chromosomes, and then we summarize our recent work on the function of the 2 elements in Bacillus subtilis as compared to Escherichia coli, in order to show how organization of the elements is related to the differences in regulation of the initiation of replication in the 2 bacteria. Remarkable conservation of genes and their organization in the replication origin region was found in 5 bacteria representative of 3 major branches of the bacterial phylogenic tree. It was concluded that the conserved region containing the dnaA gene is the replication origin of the ancestral bacterium. Conservation of DnaA protein and its binding sequence (DnaA box) is remarkable, suggesting that they are the initiator and replicator of the chromosomes of most eubacteria. We have recently isolated an autonomously replicating sequence (ars) from B. subtilis. The essential features of ars, the presence of DnaA boxes and repeats of an AT rich 15-mer, are the same as E. coli oriC. However, 2 DnaA-box regions flanking the dnaA gene are both required for B. subtilis ars. The function of DnaA protein in vivo was studied in detail using a temperature-sensitive dnaA mutant in B. subtilis.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    Two RNA polymerase sigma factors, sigma F and sigma E, are produced during the first two hours of endospore formation in Bacillus subtilis. Transcription of the structural genes for these factors is activated about one hour after the start of endospore formation. The operon encoding sigma F is transcribed by RNA polymerase containing sigma H, another secondary sigma factor, whereas the operon encoding sigma E is transcribed by RNA polymerase containing sigma A, the primary sigma factor in growing cells. Evidently, the coordinate temporal control of these transcriptional units is mediated by a factor other than the sigma factors, possibly by the DNA-binding protein encoded by spo0A. Both sigma F and sigma E activities are also regulated by mechanisms operating after transcription.    Subtractive differential hybridization was used to identify genes in Bacillus subtilis that are induced by nutrient limitation. Several transcription units were identified. They exhibited increased transcription when cells were deprived of certain nutrients, such as glucose, ammonium, or phosphate, or when cells were treated with decoyinine. The genes have been designated dci (for decoyinine-inducible) and gsi (for glucose-starvation-inducible). Using lacZ transcriptional fusions, the dependence of dci and gsi expression on gene products of the sensor and activator classes of bacterial two-component regulatory systems was examined. Transcription of dciA was impaired by a mutation in spoOA, while expression of gsiA was dependent on the early competence genes comP and comA. The implications of these findings are discussed, and a provisional scheme for information flow during the transition phase from growth to sporulation is proposed.    Alkaline phosphatase (APase) expression can be induced in Bacillus subtilis by phosphate starvation or by sporulation. We have recently shown that there are multiple APase structural genes contributing to the total alkaline phosphatase expression in B. subtilis. The expression of the alkaline phosphatase III gene (phoAIII) was analysed under both phosphate-starvation induction and sporulation induction conditions. phoAII is transcribed from two promoter regions, PV and PS. The PV promoter initiated transcription 37 bp before the translation initiation codon and was used to transcribe phoAIII during phosphate-starvation induction in vegetative cells. The PS promoter initiated transcription 119 bp before the translation initiation codon and was used during sporulation induction. Genes which have previously been shown to affect total vegatative APase, pho regulon genes phoP, phoR and phoS, affected expression of phoAIII during phosphate starvation. Genes known to affect expression of total sporulation APase, i.e. spoIIA, spoIIG and spoIIE, affected phoAIII expression during sporulation induction. Our data show that one member of the APase multigene family, phoAIII, contributes to the total APase expression both during phosphate-starvation induction and sporulation induction, and that the mechanism of regulation includes two promoters, each requiring different regulatory genes.    The Escherichia coli lep gene, encoding signal peptidase I (SPase I) was provided with Bacillus subtilis transcription/translation signals and expressed in this organism. When present on a low-copy-number plasmid, the amount of E. coli SPase I produced (per mg cell protein) in B. subtilis was half that produced in wild-type E. coli cells. The production of E. coli SPase I in B. subtilis was increased approximately fivefold by cloning the lep gene into a high-copy-number plasmid. The expression of E. coli SPase I in B. subtilis did not appear to increase the rate of processing of two hybrid secretory precursor proteins. Two observations may explain the failure of E. coli SPase I to stimulate processing of exported proteins in B. subtilis. First, the E. coli SPase I was apparently not exposed on the outside of the B. subtilis cytoplasmic membrane, indicating its incorrect insertion into the membrane. Second, in vitro processing studies, using cell-free extracts of B. subtilis producing E. coli SPase I, suggested that the enzyme was not active. A further outcome of this study was that conditions favouring processing of precursors by SPase I in cell-free extracts of E. coli did not favour processing by the corresponding enzyme in B. subtilis cell-free extracts. This suggests that significant differences exist between the two enzymes. The observation that antibodies directed against E. coli SPase I did not cross-react with B. subtilis membrane proteins supports this idea.    recF resides between the dnaN and gyrB genes of Bacillus subtilis. The recF15 mutation results in replacement of a glutamate residue in the wild type with a lysine residue in the mutant RecF protein. We investigated the in vivo regulation of recF using a transcriptional fusion to the xylE gene and assaying mRNA production. We found that novobiocin leads to a four-fold induction in recF gene expression, but this is not observed in a gyrB mutant strain. Enhancement of expression of the recF gene in the presence of novobiocin is unrelated to the SOS response. The RecF protein, which has a predicted molecular mass of 42.2 kDa, does not seem to be involved in its own regulation.    The sequence and properties of the comQ gene are described. comQ was predicted to encode a 34,209-Da protein, and the product of comQ was shown to be required for the development of genetic competence. The apparent transcriptional initiation and termination sites of comQ were mapped, and the location of a likely E sigma A promoter was inferred. The expression of comQ was maximal early in growth and declined as the cells approached the stationary phase. This expression was not dependent on any of the competence regulatory genes tested (comA, comP, sin, abrB, degU, and spo0A). Disruption of comQ in the chromosome prevented the development of competence as well as the transcription of comG, a late competence operon. This disruption also decreased the expression of srfA, a regulatory operon needed for the expression of competence. These and other results suggest a role for ComQ early in the hierarchy of competence regulatory genes, probably as a component of a signal transduction system.    srfA is an operon required for the production of the lipopeptide antibiotic surfactin, competence development, and efficient sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. The expression of srfA is induced after the end of exponential growth and is dependent on the products of late-growth regulatory genes comP, comA, and spo0K. To begin to understand the mechanism of srfA regulation, the srfA promoter region was identified and characterized. To examine srfA promoter activity, the srfA promoter was fused to lacZ and inserted into the B. subtilis chromosome as a single copy at the SP beta prophage. The location of the transcription start site of srfA was determined by primer extension analysis and shown to be preceded by a sequence that resembles the consensus promoter recognized by the sigma A form of RNA polymerase. The srfA operon was found to have a sequence corresponding to a long, untranslated leader region of the srfA mRNA (300 bp). A nucleotide sequence and mutational analysis of the promoter identified a region of dyad symmetry required for srfA-lacZ expression. A similar sequence is found in the region upstream of the degQ promoter, transcription from which is also regulated by ComA. This region of dyad symmetry found upstream of these promoters may be the target for ComA-dependent transcriptional activation.    Negative controls play an important role in the regulation of differentiation in many organisms. Sporulation in Bacillus subtilis is also regulated by DNA-binding proteins which exert a repressive effect on genes which are essential for this process. AbrB represses spo0H, coding for sigma H. One of the earliest events in the initiation of sporulation is the lifting of this repression so that more sigma H can be made. As part of an RNA polymerase holoenzyme, this positive transcription factor is responsible for the elevated synthesis of sufficient phosphorylated Spo0A to activate the expression of several stage II genes. Sin, another DNA-binding protein, represses the same genes, spoIIA, spoIIE and spoIIG, that are activated by Spo0A. Thus sporulation is controlled at the two earliest stages by at least two repressors. Sin and AbrB are repressors of other late growth functions but are essential for competence development. Sin is also a positive regulator for motility and autolysin production. These results suggest that AbrB and Sin act as developmental switches, enabling cells at the beginning of stationary growth to choose different developmental fates.    Sporulation in Bacillus subtilis is a developmental process induced as a response to nutritional stress. Activation of sporulation-specific gene transcription is under the control of the spoOA gene product. The SpoOA protein and the SpoOF protein are both homologous to response regulator proteins of two-component regulatory systems which control bacterial responses to a variety of environmental challenges. Response regulators are activated by specific kinases which phosphorylate them. In this study, it was shown that phosphorylation of SpoOA occurs via a phosphotransferase which is the product of the spoOB locus. The phosphodonor in this reaction is the phosphorylated form of SpoOF. It is postulated that SpoOF acts as a secondary messenger that can be phosphorylated by a variety of kinases depending on the particular environmental stress. The series of phosphate transfer reactions in this system is called a phosphorelay. The end product of this series of reactions is SpoOA approximately P which is shown to have greater affinity for the DNA target, the OA box, of SpoOA on the abrB promoter than the unphosphorylated form. SpoOA approximately P, but not SpoOA, was shown to be an activator of transcription of the spoIIA operon which codes for the sporulation-specific sigma factor sigma F. Thus, the initiation of sporulation is dependent on SpoOA approximately P which arises through the phosphorelay and which acts as a transcription factor to repress certain genes, e.g. abrB, and activate others, e.g. spoIIA.    The ftsZ gene is essential for initiation of cell division in Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis. To begin our studies of division arrest during differentiation of Rhizobium meliloti bacteroids, we isolated a R. meliloti ftsZ homolog, ftsZRm. Degenerate primers directed towards a conserved region of ftsZ were used to amplify a segment of R. meliloti DNA by polymerase chain reaction, and the product of this reaction was then used to isolate positive clones from a bacteriophage library. The DNA sequence of an open reading frame containing the region of homology indicated that the R. meliloti FtsZ protein (FtsZRm) is 50% homologous to the known E. coli and B. subtilis FtsZ proteins, but at 590 amino acids (63 kDa), it is predicted to be nearly 50% larger. Strong expression of an approximately 70-kDa labeled protein in a coupled in vitro transcription-translation system supports this prediction. The additional 200 amino acids appear to fall in a single internal domain highly enriched for proline and glutamine residues. When we regulated R. meliloti ftsZ (ftsZRm) expression on a high-copy-number plasmid in E. coli with Plac and laclq, cells were smaller than normal in the presence of low FtsZRm levels (with no isopropyl-beta-D-thiogalactopyranoside [IPTG]) and filamentous when FtsZRm was overproduced (with IPTG). These results suggest that low levels of FtsZRm stimulate E. coli cell division, while high levels may be inhibitory.    The translational attenuation regulatory model suggests a mechanism that can explain the induction of cat-86 by chloramphenicol (Cm). In this model, Cm serves to stall a ribosome at a specific site in a leader region of cat-86 transcripts. The stalled ribosome is thought to destabilize a downstream region of RNA secondary structure that normally sequesters the cat-86 ribosome-binding site (RBS-3). Three mutations in codon 4 of the cat-86 leader have been identified which result in constitutive cat expression. Each of the three mutations generates a likely -10 promoter sequence in the leader. Twenty nucleotides (nt) upstream is the wild-type sequence, 5&apos;-TTGAAA, which differs from the consensus sigA -35 domain by only a single nt. The transcription start point from the resulting mutant promoter is within the DNA region that normally specifies the RNA secondary structure that sequesters cat-86 RBS-3. Thus, the basis for the constitutive phenotype is the absence of the RNA secondary structure in the transcripts driven by the promoter generated through mutagenesis of leader codon 4.    The amino acid sequence of the rat 40S ribosomal subunit protein S18 was deduced from the sequence of nucleotides in a recombinant cDNA. S18 has 152 amino acids and has a molecular weight of 17,707. Hybridization of the cDNA to digests of nuclear DNA suggests that there are 10-13 copies of the S18 gene. The mRNA for the protein is about 600 nucleotides in length. Rat S18 is identical to mouse S18 (also referred to as KE3) and is related to Escherichia coli S13 and to other S13-like ribosomal proteins from Bacillus subtilis, from Bacillus stearothermophilus, and from plant mitochondria (Nicotiana tabacum and Zea mays).    The AbrB protein of B. subtilis represses the transcription of various postexponentially expressed genes, such as the antibiotic biosynthesis gene tycA. Recently, we have shown that ArbB binds to the tycA promoter region at two A + T-rich sites; the &apos;promoter site&apos; (-60 to -35) and the &apos;leader site&apos; (+169 to +231). In this study we demonstrate that a Ptyc-lacZ fusion missing the leader region is constitutively expressed in wild-type B. subtilis cells and in B. subtilis cells carrying spoOA or abrB mutations. We also show that substitution mutations within the recently reported potential helix-turn-helix DNA binding motif of AbrB did not affect its specific DNA binding ability.    The gerD locus of Bacillus subtilis comprises a single gene whose function is essential for the germination of B. subtilis spores in media containing asparagine, glucose, and fructose. The expression of gerD has been characterized by using a chromosomal lacZ fusion to the gerD promoter. The promoter is switched on at the same time as the synthesis of glucose dehydrogenase, 2.5 h after sporulation has been initiated in the developing forespore. The gerD gene is not expressed in spoIIB or spoIIIA, -IIIB, -EIII, -FIII, or -IIIG mutants, but it is expressed in spoIIIC and -IIID and spoIVA mutant backgrounds. The in vivo transcriptional start point of the gene has been mapped by primer extension analysis, and sequences upstream from the start point show considerable homology with the promoter consensus sequences recognized by RNA polymerase containing the forespore-specific sigma factor sigma G (E sigma G). gerD is transcribed in vitro by E sigma G with a similar if not identical start point to that found in vivo, and expression of the gene can be rapidly induced in vegetative cells following the induction of sigma G synthesis. These results indicate that gerD is another member of the sigma G regulon, which includes a number of genes expressed only in the forespore compartment of sporulating cells of B. subtilis.    We cloned and sequenced a fragment of the Bacillus stearothermophilus NUB36 chromosome that contains two open reading frames (ORFs) whose products were detected only in cells of cultures grown in complex medium at high temperature. The nucleotide sequence of the two ORFs exhibited significant identity to the sequence of the glnQ and glnH loci of the glutamine transport system in enteric bacteria. In addition, growth response to glutamine, sensitivity to the toxic glutamine analog gamma-L-glutamylhydrazide, and glutamine transport assays with parental strain NUB3621 and mutant strain NUB36500, in which the ORF1 coding segment in the chromosome was interrupted with the cat gene, demonstrated that glnQ and glnH encode proteins that are active in the glutamine transport system in B. stearothermophilus. The inferred promoter for the glnQH operon exhibited a low homology to the -35 and -10 regions of the consensus promoter sequences of Bacillus subtilis and Escherichia coli genes. In addition, the inferred promoter for the glnQH operon also exhibited a low homology with the consensus promoter sequence deduced from the sequences of the promoters of nine different genes from B. stearothermophilus. Transcription of the glnQH operon was activated in a nitrogen-rich medium at high temperature and inhibited under the same conditions at low temperature. Transcription of the glnQH operon was partially activated in a nitrogen-poor medium at low temperature. The region upstream from glnQ contains sequences that have a low homology with the nitrogen regulator I-binding sequences and the nitrogen-regulated promoters of enteric bacteria. The effect of temperature on the regulation of the glnQH operon is discussed.    The Bacillus subtilis dciA operon, which encodes a dipeptide transport system, was induced rapidly by several conditions that caused the cells to enter stationary phase and initiate sporulation. The in vivo start point of transcription was mapped precisely and shown to correspond to a site of transcription initiation in vitro by the major vegetative form of RNA polymerase. Post-exponential expression was prevented by a mutation in the spo0A gene (whose product is a known regulator of early sporulation genes) but was restored in a spo0A abrB double mutant. This implicated AbrB, another known regulator, as a repressor of dciA. In fact, purified AbrB protein bound to a portion of the dciA promoter region, protecting it against DNase I digestion. Expression of dciA in growing cells was also repressed independently by glucose and by a mixture of amino acids; neither of these effects was mediated by AbrB.    Two previously identified Bacillus subtilis DNA segments, dciA and dciB, whose transcripts accumulate very rapidly after induction of sporulation, were found in the same 6.2 kb transcription unit, now known as the dciA operon. Analysis of the sequence of the dciA operon showed that its putative products are homologous to bacterial peptide transport systems. The product of the fifth gene, DciAE, is similar to peptide-binding proteins from Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium (DppA and OppA) and B. subtilis (OppA). A null mutation in dciAE abolished the ability of a proline auxotroph to grow in a medium containing the dipeptide Pro-Gly as sole proline source, suggesting that the dciA operon encodes a dipeptide transport system.    ermK instructs bacteria to synthesize an erythromycin-inducible 23S rRNA methylase that confers resistance to the macrolide, lincosamide, and streptogramin B antibiotics. Expression of ermK is regulated by transcriptional attenuation, in contrast to other inducible erm genes, previously described, which are regulated translationally. The ermK mRNA leader sequence has a total length of 357 nucleotides and encodes a 14-amino-acid leader peptide together with its ribosome binding site. Additionally, the mRNA leader sequence can fold in either of two mutually exclusive conformations, one of which is postulated to form in the absence of induction and to contain two rho factor-independent terminators. Truncated transcription products ca. 210 and 333 nucleotides long were synthesized in the absence of induction, both in vivo and in vitro, as predicted by the transcriptional attenuation model; run-off transcription in vitro with rITP favored the synthesis of the full-length run-off transcript over that of the 210- and 333-nucleotide truncated products. Northern (RNA) blot analysis of transcripts synthesized in vivo in the absence of erythromycin indicated that transcription terminated at either of the two inverted complementary repeat sequences in the leader that were postulated to serve as rho factor-independent terminators; moreover, no full-length transcripts were detectable in the uninduced samples. In contrast, full-length (ca. 1,200-nucleotide) transcripts were only detected in RNA samples synthesized in vivo in the presence of erythromycin. Full-length transcripts formed in the absence of induction from transcriptional readthrough past the two proposed transcription terminators would fold in a way that would sequester the ribosome binding site together with the first two codons of the ErmK methylase, reducing its efficiency in translation. This feature could therefore provide additional control of expression in the absence of induction; however, such regulation, if operative, would act only secondarily, both in time and place, relative to transcriptional control. Analysis by reverse transcriptase mapping of in vivo transcripts from two primers that bracket the transcription terminator responsible for the 210-nucleotide truncated fragment supports the transcriptional attenuation model proposed and suggests further that the synthesis of the ermK message is initiated constitutively upstream of the proposed terminator but completed inductively downstream of this site.    The DNA binding protein, GlnR, encoded by glnR, is believed to be directly responsible for regulating glnRA expression in Bacillus subtilis. Identification of cis-acting loci involved in glnRA control is the focus of this study. Analysis of glnRA-lacZ transcriptional fusions harboring deletions extending into the promoter region demonstrated that sequences upstream from position -35, relative to the transcription start-point, were necessary for nitrogen source regulation. These sequences included a 21 base-pair (bp) element, from positions -40 to -60, having 2-fold symmetry; the element shares homology to certain binding sites utilized by proteins having the alpha-helix-turn-alpha-helix motif, of which GlnR is a member. Involvement of this element in regulation was examined by using synthetic DNA fragments containing the promoter and upstream sequences driving lacZ expression. Fragments extending from positions -63 to -8 and from positions -52 to -8 yielded full and partial regulation, respectively. Regulation from a fragment containing a 5 bp insertion between positions -36 and -37 was impaired. A T.A to A.T transversion mutation at position -41 did not have any detectable effect on regulation, whereas a T.A to C.G transition mutation at the same site resulted in constitutive expression. Using a gel electrophoresis mobility shift assay, it was found that purified GlnR bound to a glnRA restriction fragment that extended from positions -104 to +83; binding was abolished after digestion with HinfI, which cleaves between positions -52 and -48. Furthermore, HinfI digestion was inhibited by the presence of GlnR. Thus, the GlnR binding site extends from the vicinity of position -35 upstream to position -63. We suggest that the glnRA operator is the 21 bp sequence lying within this region.    Nucleotide sequence analysis of a 5,000-bp region of the bialaphos antibiotic production (bap) gene cluster defined five open reading frames (ORFs) which predicted structural genes in the order bah, ORF1, ORF2, and ORF3 followed by the regulatory gene, brpA (H. Anzai, T. Murakami, S. Imai, A. Satoh, K. Nagaoka, and C.J. Thompson, J. Bacteriol. 169:3482-3488, 1987). The four structural genes were translationally coupled and apparently cotranscribed from an undefined promoter(s) under the positive control of the brpA gene product. S1 mapping experiments indicated that brpA was transcribed by two promoters (brpAp1 and brpAp2) which initiate transcription 150 and 157 bp upstream of brp A within an intergenic region and at least one promoter further upstream within the bap gene cluster (brpAp3). All three transcripts were present at low levels during exponential growth and increased just before the stationary phase. The levels of the brpAp3 band continued to increase at the onset of stationary phase, whereas brpAp1-and brpAp2-protected fragments showed no further change. BrpA contained a possible helix-turn-helix motif at its C terminus which was similar to the C-terminal regulatory motif found in the receiver component of a family of two-component transcriptional activator proteins. This motif was not associated with the N-terminal domain conserved in other members of the family. The structural gene cluster sequenced began with bah, encoding a bialaphos acetylhydrolase which removes the N-acetyl group from bialaphos as one of the final steps in the biosynthetic pathway. The observation that Bah was similar to a rat and to a bacterial (Acinetobacter calcoaceticus) lipase probably reflects the fact that the ester bonds of triglycerides and the amide bond linking acetate to phosphinothricin are similar and hydrolysis is catalyzed by structurally related enzymes. This was followed by two regions encoding ORF1 and ORF2 which were similar to each other (48% nucleotide identity, 31% amino acid identity), as well as to GrsT, a protein encoded by a gene located adjacent to gramicidin S synthetase in Bacillus brevis, and to vertebrate (mallard duck and rat) thioesterases. The amino acid sequence and hydrophobicity profile of ORF3 indicated that it was related to a family of membrane transport proteins. It was strikingly similar to the citrate uptake protein encoded by the transposon Tn3411.    Transcription from P2, one of the major promoters of the cell wall protein gene operon of Bacillus brevis 47, was markedly enhanced at the early stationary phase of growth. MgCl2, when added at 1 to 5 mM to the medium, inhibited this enhancement of transcription as well as shedding of the cell wall protein layers from the cell surface. MgSO4 or CaCl2 showed an effect similar to that of MgCl2. The possible coordination of the cell wall structure with regulation of the cell wall protein genes is discussed.    Mutations in the Bacillus subtilis major RNA polymerase sigma factor gene (rpoD/crsA47) and a sensory receiver gene (spoOA/rvtA11) are potent intergenic suppressors of several stage 0 sporulation mutations (spoOB, OE, OF &amp; OK). We show here that these suppressors also rescue temperature-sensitive sporulation phenotypes (Spots) caused by mutations in RNA polymerase, ribosomal protein, and protein synthesis elongation factor EF-G genes. The effects of the crsA and rvtA suppressors on RNA polymerase and ribosomal protein spots mutations are similar to those previously described for mutations in another intergenic suppressor gene rev. We have examined the effects of rvtA and crsA mutations on the expression of sporulation-associated membrane proteins, including flagellin and penicillin binding protein 5* (PBP 5*). Both suppressors restored sporulation and synthesis of PBP 5* in several spoO mutants. However, only rvtA restored flagellin synthesis in spoO suppressed backgrounds. The membrane protein phenotypes resulting from the presence of crsA or rvtA suppressors in spoO strains suggests that these suppressors function via distinct molecular mechanisms. The rvtA and crsA mutations are also able to block the ability of ethanol to induce spoO phenocopies at concentrations of ethanol which prevent sporulation in wild type cells. The effects of ethanol on sporulation-associated membrane protein synthesis in wild type and suppressor containing strains have been examined.    The primary structures of the 16S rRNAs of Bacillus anthracis, Bacillus cereus, Bacillus mycoides, and Bacillus thuringiensis were determined by using the reverse transcription-dideoxy sequencing method. All of the strains exhibited very high levels of sequence similarity (greater than 99%) that were consistent with the close relationships shown by previous DNA hybridization studies. The sequences of B. anthracis Sterne and B. cereus emetic strain NCTC 11143 were found to be identical for a continuous stretch of 1,446 bases and differed from the sequence of B. cereus NCDO 1771T (T = type strain) by only a single nucleotide. The 16S rRNA sequences of B. mycoides and B. thuringiensis differed from each other and from the sequences of B. anthracis and B. cereus by four to nine nucleotides.    The role of the rodC operon in Bacillus subtilis was investigated. The operon encodes two genes (rodD and rodC) necessary for the synthesis of the cell wall teichoic acid. Transcription of this operon is responsive to levels of phosphate and to concentrations of magnesium ions in the growth medium. This regulation of mRNA production corresponds to conditions that dictate the type of polymer that will be synthesized for the cell wall, i.e., teichoic or teichuronic acid. While the introduction of multiple copies of rodC was tolerated by the cells, multiple copies of rodD appeared to be lethal. The lethality of the rodD fragment was not exhibited if multiple copies of rodC were also present.    Protein p4 of the Bacillus subtilis phage phi 29 switches on the transcription of the viral late genes by binding to the viral late promoter at a region close to the RNA polymerase binding site. Gel retardation and DNase I footprinting assays show that the presence of protein p4 is required for RNA polymerase recognition of the late promoter. The protein p4 and RNA polymerase DNA binding sites have been separated by the insertion of bent and non-bent DNA sequences of different lengths. These mutant promoters were used to study in vitro their protein p4-dependent transcriptional activity and their interaction with both protein p4 and RNA polymerase. The results indicate that protein p4 is able to function at longer DNA distances from the RNA polymerase binding site than in the natural promoter. The extent of protein p4 activity depended on the length and conformation of the inserted DNA. Activation of transcription and RNA polymerase binding was favoured when the relative orientation of protein p4 and RNA polymerase was conserved and when the intervening DNA had a bent conformation. These data, together with the DNase I footprints, suggest that activation at distance by protein p4 involves a DNA loop held by the interaction of protein p4 and RNA polymerase.    Bacillus subtilis and related gram-positive bacteria which have low to moderate genomic G + C contents are unable to efficiently translate mRNA derived from gram-negative bacteria, whereas Escherichia coli and other gram-negative bacteria are able to translate mRNA from both types of organisms. This phenomenon has been termed translational species specificity. Ribosomes from the low-G + C-content group (low-G + C group) of gram-positive organisms (B. subtilis and relatives) lack an equivalent to Escherichia ribosomal protein S1. The requirement for S1 for translation in E. coli (G. van Dieijen, P. H. van Knippenberg, J. van Duin, B. Koekman, and P. H. Pouwels, Mol. Gen. Genet. 153:75-80, 1977) and its specific role (A.R. Subramanian, Trends Biochem. Sci. 9:491-494, 1984) have been proposed. The group of gram-positive bacteria characterized by high genomic G + C content (formerly Actinomyces species and relatives) contain S1, in contrast to the low-G + C group (K. Mikulik, J. Smardova, A. Jiranova, and P. Branny, Eur. J. Biochem. 155:557-563, 1986). It is not known whether members of the high-G + C group are translationally specific, although there is evidence that one genus, Streptomyces, can express Escherichia genes in vivo (M. J. Bibb and S. N. Cohen, Mol. Gen. Genet. 187:265-277, 1985; J. L. Schottel, M. J. Bibb, and S. N. Cohen, J. Bacteriol. 146:360-368, 1981). In order to determine whether the organisms of this group are translationally specific, we examined the in vitro translational characteristics of a member of the high-G + C group, Micrococcus luteus, whose genomic G + C content is 73%.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    The genetic determinant for abortive infection of bacteriophage (Abi) from the lactococcal plasmid pCI829 was cloned on a 6.2 kb StuI fragment in Escherichia coli using the shuttle vector pSA3. In Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis MG1363Sm the resulting recombinant plasmid pCI816 conferred complete insensitivity to the small isometric-headed phage 712 and a reduced plaque size in the case of the prolate-headed phage c2. The determinant was further localized by subcloning and nuclease Bal31 deletion analysis; approximately 2.0 kb of DNA was essential for the expression of the Abi+ phenotype. Nucleotide sequence analysis of this region revealed a putative open reading frame of 1887 base pairs preceded by a putative promotor sequence and ribosome-binding site which exhibited similarity to consensus E. coli and Bacillus subtilis transcription/translation signals. Hybridization experiments indicated that this region was not homologous to the abi determinant from the phenotypically similar lactococcal plasmid pCI750.    Two sigma factors, sigma 35 and sigma 28, direct transcription from the Bt I and Bt II promoters of the cryIA(a) gene of Bacillus thuringiensis; this gene encodes a lepidopteran-specific crystal protoxin. These sigma factors were biochemically characterized in previous work (K. L. Brown and H. R. Whiteley, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85:4166-4170, 1988; K. L. Brown and H. R. Whiteley, J. Bacteriol. 172:6682-6688, 1990). In this paper, we describe the cloning of the genes encoding these two sigma factors, as well as their nucleotide and deduced amino acid sequences. The deduced amino acid sequences of the sigma 35 and sigma 28 genes show 88 and 85% identity, respectively, to the sporulation-specific sigma E and sigma K polypeptides of Bacillus subtilis. Transformation of the sigma 35 and sigma 28 genes into B. subtilis shows that the respective B. thuringiensis sigma factor genes can complement spoIIG55 (sigma E) and spoIIIC94 (sigma K) defects. Further, B. thuringiensis core polymerase reconstituted with either the sigma 35 or sigma 28 polypeptide directs transcription from B. subtilis promoters recognized by B. subtilis RNA polymerase containing sigma E and sigma K, respectively. Thus, sigma 35 and sigma 28 of B. thuringiensis appear to be functionally equivalent to sigma E and sigma K of B. subtilis. However, unlike the situation for sigma K in B. subtilis, the homologous sigma 28 gene in B. thuringiensis does not result from a late-sporulation-phase chromosomal rearrangement of two separate, partial genes.    L-Aspartase was purified from Bacillus subtilis, its N-terminal amino acid sequence was determined to construct a probe for the aspartase gene, and the gene (termed ansB) was cloned and sequenced. A second gene (termed ansA) was found upstream of the ansB gene and coded for L-asparaginase. These two genes were in an operon designated the ans operon, which is 80% cotransformed with the previously mapped aspH1 mutation at 215 degrees. Primer extension analysis of in vivo ans mRNA revealed two transcription start sites, depending on the growth medium. In wild-type cells in log-phase growth in 2x YT medium (tryptone-yeast extract rich medium), the ans transcript began at -67 relative to the translation start site, while cells in log-phase growth or sporulating (t1 to t4) in 2x SG medium (glucose nutrient broth-based moderately rich medium) had an ans transcript which began at -73. The level of the -67 transcript was greatly increased in an aspH mutant grown in 2x YT medium; the -67 transcript also predominated when this mutant was grown in 2x SG medium, although the -73 transcript was also present. In vitro transcription of the ans operon by RNA polymerase from log-phase cells grown in 2x YT medium and log-phase or sporulating cells grown in 2x SG medium yielded only the -67 transcript. Depending on the growth medium, the levels of asparaginase and aspartase were from 2- to 40-fold higher in an aspH mutant than in wild-type cells, and evidence was obtained indicating that the gene defined by the aspH1 mutation codes for a trans-acting transcriptional regulatory factor. In wild-type cells grown in 2x SG medium, the levels of both aspartase and asparaginase decreased significantly by t0 of sporulation but then showed a small increase, which was mirrored by changes in the level of beta-galactosidase from an ansB-lacZ fusion. The increase in the activities of ans operon enzymes between t2 and t5 of sporulation was found primarily in the forespore, and the great majority of the increased was found in the mature spore. However, throughout sporulation the only ans transcript detected was the -73 form, and no sporulation-specific RNA polymerase tested yielded a -73 transcript in vitro.    Amino acid sequence of the 36 KD protein which is the active subunit of immunoglobulin production stimulating factor-II alpha (IPSF-II alpha) derived from Burkitt&apos;s lymphoma Namalwa cells was analyzed for the 20 amino acids from N-terminus. The N-terminal amino acid sequence of this protein coincided very closely with glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GPD; EC 1.2.1.12) derived from various origins. Especially, it was completely homologous with that of human liver GPD. Several GPD&apos;s derived from human erythrocyte, rabbit muscle and Bacillus stearothermophilus also stimulated IgM production of hybridomas, as well as IPSF-II alpha. Conversely, IPSF-II alpha had GPD enzymic activity as strong as rabbit muscle and B. stearothermophilus, and stronger than human erythrocyte GPD. These results suggested that 36 KD subunit of IPSF-II alpha was a GPD, or GPD like protein. The level of mRNA for IgM was not enhanced by IPSF-II alpha in hybridoma cells, though the IgM productivity of the cell was remarkably stimulated by the protein, indicating that IPSF-II alpha does not stimulate immunoglobulin production by enhancement of transcription.    A 170bp long BamHI-Sau3A DNA fragment from the actIII-actI intergenic region of the actinorhodin (Act) biosynthetic gene cluster of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) contains two promoters directing transcription in a divergent manner. One of them, the actIII promoter, is responsible for the transcription of the actIII gene and the other controls transcription of the adjacent actI region in the opposite direction. Weak activity of the actIII promoter can be detected in Streptomyces lividans and Bacillus subtilis in the absence but not in the presence of glucose. Neither promoter seems to function in Escherichia coli.    Sigma factors (sigma) are transcription factors that operate global switches in gene expression in prokaryotes. They work by directing core RNA polymerase to specific cis-acting promoter sequences; each sigma has a cognate class of promoters with specific sequence characteristics. In Bacillus subtilis four different sigma factors have been implicated in the regulation of gene expression during spore formation, which is a simple differentiation system involving two cell types. In this review I show how the modern developmental system may have arisen from a primitive organism that used only two sigma factors, by a series of steps involving gene duplication and divergence. The increasing sophistication of eukaryotic developmental systems may reflect similar evolutionary processes.    The spoIIA operon encodes three genes, including the structural gene for a sporulation-induced sigma factor sigma F. We used deletion analysis of spoIIA-lacZ fusions to define the location of the spoIIA promoter. We found that sigma H-RNA polymerase transcribes spoIIA accurately in vitro and propose that sigma H directs transcription of spoIIA during sporulation.    Examination of the effects of 56 single-base-pair substitutions in the spoIIG promoter and studies of the interaction of the spo0A product (Spo0A) with this promoter in vitro demonstrated that Spo0A acts directly to enable this promoter to be used by sigma A-associated RNA polymerase (EC 2.7.7.6). The spoIIG operon from Bacillus subtilis is transcribed during sporulation by a form o RNA polymerase containing sigma A, the primary sigma factor in vegetative cells. The spoIIG promoter is unusual in that it contains sequences that are similar to those found at the -10 and -35 regions of promoters that are used by sigma A-associated RNA polymerase, but these sigma A-like recognition sequences are separated by 22 base pairs rather than the typical 17 or 18 base pairs. We found that single-base-pair substitutions in the around the -35-like sequence, and substitutions in a region upstream from this position, around position -87, reduced promoter activity. DNase I protection and electrophoretic gel mobility shift assays were used to demonstrate that Spo0A binds specifically to these regions in vitro. Evidently, the -35-like sequence is part of a Spo0A binding site and therefore is possibly not a sigma A-recognition sequence. These results support a model in which Spo0A activates the spoIIG promoter after the onset of endospore formation.    A 12.5-kilobase segment of Bacillus subtilis chromosomal DNA containing the entire pyrimidine biosynthetic (pyr) gene cluster has been cloned and sequenced. The sequenced DNA has seven cistrons encoding the six enzymes of de novo pyrimidine nucleotide biosynthesis and two open reading frames of unknown function. Based on the sequence and mapping of transcripts, the genes in this cluster appear to be transcribed on one large polycistronic message in the order ORF1, pyrB, pyrC, pyrAA, pyrAB, ORF2, pyrD, pyrF, pyrE. The deduced amino acid sequences for six pyrimidine biosynthetic enzymes from B. subtilis and comparisons with the corresponding sequences from numerous other species are presented. The 3&apos; ends of the reading frames overlap the 5&apos; ends of the downstream open reading frames for all cistrons in the cluster except ORF1 and pyrB, which are separated by a 145-base pair intercistronic region. The start of transcription was mapped by primer extension to a G residue 158 nucleotides upstream from the translation initiation codon of ORF1. This site is preceded by a typical B. subtilis sigma A-dependent promoter. A promoter indicator plasmid was used to show that this region carried a promoter from which transcription was regulated by pyrimidines. Transcription from this promoter was not detected in primer extension experiments using mRNA prepared from B. subtilis cells grown in the presence of excess uracil. No transcripts initiating from the intercistronic space between ORF1 and pyrB were detected with S1 nuclease mapping; however, a transcription terminator was detected in this region that reduced but did not fully block transcriptional readthrough. This terminator was not regulated by pyrimidines in the growth medium under the conditions tested. The region immediately following the promoter and 5&apos; to ORF1 has a potential transcription terminator sequence. The roles, if any, of these transcription terminators in the regulation of pyr operon expression are yet to be determined. However, deletion of the terminator immediately following the promoter abolished pyrimidine regulation of transcription in the indicator plasmid.    Expression of Bacillus subtilis phage phi 29 late genes requires the transcriptional activator protein p4. This activator binds to a region of the late A3 promoter spanning nucleotides -56 to -102 relative to the transcription start site, generating a strong bending Tin the DNA. In this work the target sequences recognized by protein p4 in the phage phi 29 late A3 promoter have been characterized. The binding of protein p4 to derivatives of the late A3 promoter harbouring deletions in the protein p4 binding site has been studied. When protein p4 recognition sequences were altered, the activator could only bind to the promoter in the presence of RNA polymerase. This strong cooperativity in the binding of protein p4 and RNA polymerase to the promoter suggests the presence of direct protein-protein contacts between them.    By Northern blot and primer extension analyses it was shown that in Bacillus stearothermophilus the genes infC, rpmI and rplT constitute a single transcriptional unit; the promoter and the transcriptional start-point used in vivo were identified and the half-life of the transcript (1.2 min) was determined. No indication of multiple initiation sites nor of differential stability of different regions of the transcript was found. The results suggest that Escherichia coli and B. stearothermophilus have a different pattern of transcription around the infC gene cluster and that differential translational efficiency within the infC-rpmI-rplT transcriptional unit accounts for the different levels of IF3, L35 and L20 expression. The rare AUU initiation codon is the only strictly conserved element of the several peculiar transcriptional and translational features found in E. coli infC. Upon changing this codon to AUG, we found a ca. 30-fold increased expression of B. stearothermophilus infC, which is similar to that previously found with E. coli infC (i.e. 40-fold), and provided evidence that regulation of infC expression through its rare AUU initiation codon might be a general phenomenon in bacteria.    Two important features of endospore development in Bacillus subtilis--the compartmentalization of mother cell gene expression and the coordination of mother cell gene expression with forespore development--are governed by the highly regulated expression of the sigK gene, which encodes the mother cell-specific RNA polymerase sigma factor sigma K. Compartmentalized expression of sigK is associated both with a chromosomal DNA rearrangement and with the restriction of sigK transcription to the mother cell. A third mode of sigK regulation, which occurs at the level of activation of the sigK gene product by proteolytic processing, serves to couple gene expression between the mother cell and forespore compartments of the developing sporangium.    A homologous class of histonelike proteins which are believed to wrap the DNA and to condense the chromosome into highly folded nucleoid structures has been identified in different bacterial species. Bacillus subtilis encodes a homodimeric DNA-binding protein called HBsu. We have cloned the corresponding gene (hbs) on a 3.8-kb fragment. The gene was subcloned to a 1-kb fragment, sequenced, and characterized. It encodes a 92-amino-acid protein with a predicted molecular mass of 9,884 Da. Fortunately, analysis of the DNA sequence downstream of the 3&apos; end of hbs revealed the location of the first 19 amino acid residues of MtrA. This finding located the hbs gene unequivocally to the 5&apos; end of the mtr operon at about 204 degrees on the standard genetic map of B. subtilis. Northern (RNA) blot analysis and primer extension studies indicated the presence of two distinct hbs transcripts, which were found to be initiated at two different sites located about 160 bases apart. Several attempts to replace the hbs gene in the B. subtilis chromosome with a cat-interrupted copy (hbs::cat) through marker replacement recombination were unsuccessful. In order to study whether hbs is an essential gene, we have constructed a strain containing a truncated copy of the gene behind its own promoter and another intact copy under control of the isopropyl-beta-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG)-inducible spac-1 promoter. In this strain (BM19), normal growth was found to depend on IPTG, whereas in the absence of IPTG, growth was severely affected. These results suggest an essential role for the hbs gene product for normal growth in B. subtilis.    Electron microscopic examination of sporulating cultures of wild-type Bacillus subtilis revealed that the morphological events previously characterized as stages II and III can be divided into four substages, namely, stages IIi, IIii, IIiii, and III. The ultrastructural phenotypes of several stage II mutant strains indicate that each of the four substages has a biochemical and genetic basis. Two of the genes needed for the transition from stage II to stage III encode transcription factors sigma E and sigma F. Their roles during spore morphogenesis have been the subject of much speculation. We now show that sigma E controls genes involved in the morphological transition from stage IIi to stage IIii and then stage IIiii, while the transition to stage III may be determined by genes controlled by sigma F. The results also indicate the existence of at least two undiscovered sporulation genes involved in B. subtilis spore morphogenesis.    The Bacillus subtilis spoIIIG gene codes for a sigma factor termed sigma G which directs transcription of genes expressed only in the forespore compartment of the sporulating cell. Use of spoIIIG-lacZ transcriptional fusions showed that spoIIIG is cotranscribed with the spoIIG operon beginning at t0.5-1 of sporulation. However, this large mRNA produced little if any sigma G, and transferring the spoIIIG gene without the spoIIG promoter into the amyE locus resulted in a Spo+ phenotype. Significant translation of spoIIIG began at t2.5-3 with use of an mRNA whose 5&apos; end is just upstream of the spoIIIG coding sequence. Synthesis of this spoIIIG-specific mRNA was not abolished by a deletion in spoIIIG itself. Similar results were obtained when a spoIIIG-lacZ translational fusion lacking the spoIIG promoter was integrated at the amyE locus. These data suggest that synthesis of sigma G is dependent neither on transcription from the spoIIG promoter nor on sigma G itself but can be due to another transcription factor. This transcription factor may be sigma F, the product of the spoIIAC locus, since a spoIIAC mutation blocked spoIIIG expression, and sequences upstream of the 5&apos; end of the spoIIIG-specific mRNA agree well with the recognition sequence for sigma F. RNA polymerase containing sigma F (E sigma F) initiated transcription in vitro on a spoIIIG template at the 5&apos; end found in vivo, as did E sigma G. However, E sigma F showed a greater than 20-fold preference for spoIIIG over a known sigma G-dependent gene compared with the activity of E sigma G.    Production of Bacillus amyloliquefaciens alpha-amylase by Saccharomyces cerevisiae using the multicopy plasmid pAAH5 and ways of improving the yields of secreted enzyme were studied. In standard non-buffered medium, alpha-amylase was rapidly inactivated but stabilization of the pH at 6 led to stable accumulation of alpha-amylase in the culture medium. Removal of 1100 bp of the upstream sequence of the ADH1 promoter present on pAAH5 resulted in delayed but increased alpha-amylase production: 29-fold in selective medium, two-fold in non-selective medium. With the original ADH1 promoter, accumulation of alpha-amylase in the medium started to level off before the cultures reached stationary phase and was very low when exponentially growing cells were transferred from glucose to ethanol. This coincided with the appearance of a mRNA larger than the alpha-amylase messenger. With the shortened promoter, the normal-size alpha-amylase mRNA was detected under all growth conditions and alpha-amylase was efficiently secreted into the medium also late in stationary phase and after transfer to ethanol. Highest total yields of alpha-amylase were obtained with the short promoter in non-selective glucose-containing medium; this may be explained by the greater final cell density obtained. However, the production of alpha-amylase per cell mass was higher in ethanol-containing selective medium. Seventy to eighty per cent of the alpha-amylase activity was secreted into the medium independent of the total amount produced.    A promoter probe vector, pTG244, was constructed with the aim of isolating transcription initiation signals from Streptococcus thermophilus (Streptococcus salivarius subsp. thermophilus). pTG244 is based on the Escherichia coli-streptococcus shuttle vector pTG222, into which the promoterless chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene of Bacillus pumilus (cat-86) was cloned. Random Sau3A fragments from the S. thermophilus A054 chromosomal DNA were cloned upstream of the cat-86 gene by using E. coli as the host. The pool of recombinant plasmids were introduced into S. thermophilus and Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis in order to search for promoter activity in these hosts. For S. thermophilus, it was necessary to first select erythromycin-resistant transformants and then to screen for chloramphenicol resistance among these. Direct selection of chloramphenicol-resistant clones was, however, possible in L. lactis subsp. lactis. Six fragments exhibiting promoter activity were characterized in S. thermophilus by measuring the levels of cat-86 transcription and/or chloramphenicol acetyltransferase specific activity. Three of the promoter-carrying fragments were sequenced. The 5&apos; ends of their corresponding mRNAs were determined by S1 mapping and shown to correspond to a purine residue in all cases. Upstream from these potential transcription start points, sequences homologous to the E. coli sigma 70 and the Bacillus subtilis vegetative sigma 43 (or sigma A) consensus promoters were identified.    We report the cloning and characterization of a gene called cotF from Bacillus subtilis that encodes alkali-soluble polypeptides of 5 and 8 kDa that are components of the spore coat. The 5- and 8-kDa polypeptides are generated by proteolytic cleavage of the primary product of the cotF gene, which is 160 codons in length and is capable of encoding a polypeptide of 19 kDa. Amino acid sequence analysis indicates that the 5-kDa species is derived from the NH2-terminal portion of the primary gene product and that the 8-kDa species is derived from the COOH-terminal portion. A mutant bearing an in vitro-constructed cotF null mutation produced normal-looking spores that contained an apparently complete set of coat proteins except for the absence of the 5- and 8-kDa polypeptides. The map position of cotF is 349 degrees. Transcription of cotF commenced coincidently (during h 6 of sporulation) with genes known to be under the control of sporulation transcription factor sigma kappa.    A new family of bacterial regulatory proteins has been identified by sequence similarity. The family contains the repressor of the Bacillus subtilis gluconate operon (GntR), the regulators for histidine utilization in Pseudomonas putida (HutCPp) and Klebsiella aerogenes (HutCKa), the repressor (FadR) of fatty acid degradation in Escherichia coli, a regulator involved in the conjugal transfer of the broad host range plasmid pIJ101 (KorA), and three proteins of unidentified function in E. coli (GenA, P30 and PhnF). The proteins share amino acid sequence similarities in a 69-residue N-terminal region. A helix-turn-helix motif is predicted in the most highly-conserved segment of each protein suggesting that they are members of a new family of helix-turn-helix DNA-binding proteins.    Increased expression of the insect control protein genes of Bacillus thuringiensis in plants has been critical to the development of genetically improved plants with agronomically acceptable levels of insect resistance. The expression of the cryIA(b) gene was compared to partially modified (3% nucleotide difference) and to fully modified (21% nucleotide difference) cryIA(b) and cryIA(c) genes in tobacco and tomato. The modified genes increased the frequency of plants that produced the proteins at quantities sufficient to control insects and dramatically increased the levels of these proteins. Among the most highly expressing transformed plants for each gene, the plants with the partially modified cryIA(b) gene had a 10-fold higher level of insect control protein and plants with the fully modified cryIA(b) had a 100-fold higher level of CryIA(b) protein compared with the wild-type gene. Similar results were obtained with the fully modified cryIA(c) gene in plants. Specific sequences of the partially modified cryIA(b) gene were analyzed for their ability to affect cryIA(b) gene expression in tobacco. The DNA sequence of a single region was identified as important to the improvement of plant expression of the cryIA(b) gene. The increased levels of cryIA(b) mRNA were not directly proportional to the increased levels of CryIA(b) protein in plants transformed with the modified cryIA(b) genes, indicating that the nucleotide sequence of these genes had an effect in improving their translational efficiency in plants.    The histidine-containing protein (HPr) of the bacterial phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent phosphotransferase system (PTS) was isolated from Staphylococcus carnosus and purified to homogeneity. The protein sequence was determined by Edman degradation of peptides obtained by proteolytic digestion with proteases V8, trypsin and chemical cleavage with BrCN. Furthermore, immunological screening of a chromosomal S. carnosus DNA gene library in pUC19 vector enabled us to isolate S. carnosus HPr-expressing colonies. The nucleotide sequence of this ptsH gene and its flanking regions was determined by the dideoxy-chain-termination technique. Upstream, the 264-bp open reading frame of the ptsH gene is flanked by a putative S. carnosus promoter structure and a putative ptsI gene downstream suggesting that ptsH gene is the first gene in the PTS operon of S. carnosus. Comparison of the amino acid sequence of S. carnosus HPr with the HPr sequence of Staphylococcus aureus (derived from peptide sequencing) showed a high degree of similarity.    Insertional mutagenesis has revealed that a 22 kbp segment from the hisA region of the Bacillus subtilis 168 chromosome (310 degrees on the genetic map) contains at least six independent transcription units, all apparently devoted to production of cell envelope components. Genes concerned with synthesis of poly(glycerol phosphate), poly(groP), an essential cell wall polymer in B. subtilis 168, are organized in two divergently transcribed operons denoted tagABC and tagDEF. Nucleotide sequence analysis indicates that three of these six genes encode extremely basic polypeptides. The deduced products of the tagABC operon may be involved in poly(groP) assembly and export, whereas those of the tagDEF operon, which are very hydrophilic, are more likely to be implicated in poly(groP) precursor biosynthesis. The first gene of the tagDEF operon encodes glycerol-3-phosphate cytidylyltransferase (Pooley et al., 1991, Journal of General Microbiology 137, 921-928) and its deduced product has significant homology with cholinephosphate cytidylyltransferase from yeast. There is also substantial homology between the deduced products of tagB in the tagABC operon and tagF in the tagDEF operon.    A protocol for transformation of intact Enterococcus faecalis cells by electroporation was developed through a systematic examination of the effects of changes in various parameters, including (i) growth conditions; (ii) composition of the electroporation solution; (iii) electroporation conditions, such as field strength and resistance; (iv) size, concentration, and purity of DNA used for transformation; and (v) conditions used to select for transformants. Key features of this protocol include the use of exponential-phase cells grown in inhibitory concentrations of glycine and the use of an acidic sucrose electroporation solution. Frequencies of greater than 2 x 10(5) transformants per microgram of plasmid DNA were obtained for E. faecalis cells, whereas various strains of streptococci and Bacillus anthracis were transformed at frequencies of 10(3) to 10(4) transformants per microgram of plasmid DNA with the same protocol. A novel Escherichia coli-Streptococcus and Enterococcus shuttle cloning vector, pDL276, was constructed for use in conjunction with the electroporation system. This vector features a multiple cloning site region flanked by E. coli transcription termination sequences, a relatively small size (less than 7 kb), and a kanamycin resistance determinant expressed in both gram-positive and gram-negative hosts. Various enterococcal and streptococcal DNA sequences were cloned in E. coli (including sequences that could not be cloned on other vectors) and were returned to the original host by electroporation. The vector and electroporation system was also used to clone directly into E. faecalis.    The Spo0A regulatory protein controls the onset of stationary phase and sporulation by controlling transcription in both a negative and a positive manner depending on the promoter affected. Missense mutations, e.g., spo0A9V, which result in alterations in the eleventh amino acid preceding the C terminus of the Spo0A protein, give rise to a protein active as a negative regulator of the abrB gene but unable to activate transcription of the spoIIA gene. Second-site suppressors of spo0A9V occurred within the spo0A gene at codons 162 and 174. These suppressors did not suppress a spo0F mutation, indicating that the suppressed protein still requires phosphorylation for activity. The results suggest that the C terminus of Spo0A interacts with the transcription complex to activate transcription.    We have shown by S1 nuclease mapping with in vivo transcripts that the differential expression of a sporulation-regulatory gene, spo0A, is regulated by switching of two discrete promoters during the initiation of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis; vegetative mRNA was transcribed from an upstream promoter (Pv, vegetative promoter), and sporulation-specific mRNA was transcribed from the other promoter (Ps, sporulation-specific promoter) about 150 bp downstream of the Pv promoter. Transcription from the Pv promoter was at a low level and shut off at T0.5. On the other hand, transcription from the Ps promoter was strongly induced at T0.5 and increased until T2.5. In the presence of 2% glucose, Pv-directed transcription was not shut off and was observed even at T1.5, whereas the induction of Ps-directed transcription was completely repressed. A mutant in which the spo0A gene was transcribed only from the Ps promoter could sporulate normally in the presence of 0.1% glucose but could not sporulate at all in the presence of 2% glucose. In a catabolite-resistant sporulation mutant carrying crsA47 (sigA47), a mutation within the gene encoding sigma A, normal promoter switching from Pv to Ps was observed in the presence of 2% glucose.    Transcription of the Bacillus subtilis spo0E gene is controlled by the AbrB transition state regulator. In AbrB+ strains, a single transcript, P1, was observed for the spo0E gene. In an abrB4 mutant strain, a second transcription start site 3 bases upstream from P1 was found to be used for the predominant transcript. P1 transcription was insensitive to the state of the abrB gene. Mutants carrying deletion or antibiotic cassette insertion mutations in the spo0E gene were Spo+. Multiple copies of the spo0E gene, not just the promoter region, were found to render strains incapable of sporulation. Spo+ strains that arose spontaneously from such Spo- strains were found to have deletions in the spo0E coding sequence on the plasmid. Strains carrying a deletion of the spo0E gene segregated Spo- colonies. These colonies were found to have secondary mutations in or near the spo0A, spo0B, or spo0F gene, suggesting that deletion of the spo0E gene results in increased pressure to sporulate that is compensated for by inactivation of one or more of the components of the signal transduction system leading to the initiation of sporulation. spo0E deletions were suppressors of the spo0F221 missense mutation but had no effect on the regulation of the spo0F, kinA, spo0A, or spo0B genes. The results suggest that the spo0E gene product is a negative regulator of the signal transduction pathway leading to sporulation.    The filamentous cyanobacterium Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120 responds to combined nitrogen deprivation by forming specialized nitrogen-fixing cells at regular intervals along the filament. Genetic and biochemical studies have indicated that regulation of gene expression during differentiation occurs at the transcriptional level. As part of a characterization of RNA polymerase during differentiation, the gene encoding the 52-kDa principal sigma factor of the Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120 vegetative-cell RNA polymerase was isolated by using an oligonucleotide probe based on the sequence of the N-terminal seven amino acids of the purified protein. sigA codes for a 390-amino-acid polypeptide that has a predicted molecular weight of 45,641. The amino acid sequence of the polypeptide encoded by sigA contains four regions corresponding to conserved domains of the principal RNA polymerase sigma factors of Escherichia coli (sigma 70) and Bacillus subtilis (sigma 43). Thus, although the subunit composition of cyanobacterial RNA polymerase core differs from that of other eubacteria (G. J. Schneider and R. Haselkorn, J. Bacteriol. 170:4136-4140, 1988), the principal sigma factor of at least one cyanobacterium is typically eubacterial. In contrast to sigma 70 and sigma 43 operon organization, sigA is monocistronic and encodes two transcripts of 1.7 and 2.2 kb. The abundance of the 1.7-kb transcript remains constant under both nitrogen-replete and nitrogen-limiting conditions, whereas the 2.2-kb transcript is induced following the removal of combined nitrogen. Continued or enhanced transcription of sigA under nitrogen starvation conditions is consistent with the observation that the principal RNA polymerase in differentiating cells contains SigA.    A 24-kb region of Cephalosporium acremonium C10 DNA was cloned by hybridization with the pcbAB and pcbC genes of Penicillium chrysogenum. A 3.2-kb BamHI fragment of this region complemented the mutation in the structural pcbC gene of the C. acremonium N2 mutant, resulting in cephalosporin production. A functional alpha-aminoadipyl-cysteinyl-valine (ACV) synthetase was encoded by a 15.6-kb EcoRI-BamHI DNA fragment, as shown by complementation of an ACV synthetase-deficient mutant of P. chrysogenum. Two transcripts of 1.15 and 11.4 kb were found by Northern (RNA blot) hybridization with probes internal to the pcbC and pcbAB genes, respectively. An open reading frame of 11,136 bp was located upstream of the pcbC gene that matched the 11.4-kb transcript initiation and termination regions. It encoded a protein of 3,712 amino acids with a deduced Mr of 414,791. The nucleotide sequence of the gene showed 62.9% similarity to the pcbAB gene encoding the ACV synthetase of P. chrysogenum; 54.9% of the amino acids were identical in both ACV synthetases. Three highly repetitive regions occur in the deduced amino acid sequence of C. acremonium ACV synthetase. Each is similar to the three repetitive domains in the deduced sequence of P. chrysogenum ACV synthetase and also to the amino acid sequence of gramicidin synthetase I and tyrocidine synthetase I of Bacillus brevis. These regions probably correspond to amino acid activating domains in the ACV synthetase protein. In addition, a thioesterase domain was present in the ACV synthetases of both fungi. A similarity has been found between the domains existing in multienzyme nonribosomal peptide synthetases and polyketide and fatty acid synthetases. The pcbAB gene is linked to the pcbC gene, forming a cluster of early cephalosporin-biosynthetic genes.    We have recently reported (M. Petricek, L. Rutberg, I. Schroder, and L. Hederstedt, J. Bacteriol. 172: 2250-2258, 1990) the cloning and sequence of a Bacillus subtilis chromosomal DNA fragment containing hemA proposed to encode the NAD(P)H-dependent glutamyl-tRNA reductase of the C5 pathway for 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) synthesis, hemX encoding a hydrophobic protein of unknown function, and hemC encoding hydroxymethylbilane synthase. In the present communication, we report the sequences and identities of three additional hem genes located immediately downstreatm of hemC, namely, hemD encoding uroporphyrinogen III synthase, hemB encoding porphobilinogen synthase, and hemL encoding glutamate-1-semialdehyde 2,1-aminotransferase. The six genes are proposed to constitute a hem operon encoding enzymes required for the synthesis of uroporphyrinogen III from glutamyl-tRNA. hemA, hemB, hemC, and hemD have all been shown to be essential for heme synthesis. However, deletion of an internal 427-bp fragment of hemL did not create a growth requirement for ALA or heme, indicating that formation of ALA from glutamate-1-semialdehyde can occur spontaneously in vivo or that this reaction may also be catalyzed by other enzymes. An analysis of B. subtilis carrying integrated plasmids or deletions-substitutions in or downstream of hemL indicates that no further genes in heme synthesis are part of the proposed hem operon.    RNase P, an endoribonuclease responsible for generating the mature 5&apos; termini of tRNA precursors, is composed of both RNA and protein. It has been demonstrated that the eubacterial RNase P RNA will, under the appropriate reaction conditions, exhibit catalytic activity in vitro. Evidence has not been obtained for catalytic activity by the RNAs of eukaryotic RNase P enzymes. Using a cDNA probe prepared from RNA copurifying with RNase P activity from the archaebacterium Haloferax volcanii, we have characterized the gene encoding the RNase P RNA. The proposed transcript from this gene can assume a structure resembling the eubacterial RNase P RNA and includes many of the highly conserved sequences of these RNAs. This RNA was incapable of cleaving pre-tRNA substrates in the absence of protein under a variety of in vitro conditions. Catalytic activity was observed when this RNA was combined with the protein subunit of the Bacillus subtilis RNase P complex. Similarities among the archaebacterial, eubacterial, and eukaryotic RNase P RNA sequences and structures are discussed.    The regulatory gene levR of the levanase operon of Bacillus subtilis was cloned and sequenced. It encodes a polypeptide of Mr 106,064 with two domains homologous to members of two families of bacterial activators. One domain in LevR is homologous with one region of bacterial regulators including SacT and SacY of B. subtilis and BglG from Escherichia coli. Another domain of LevR is homologous to one part of the central domain of NifA and NtrC, which control nitrogen assimilation in Gram-negative bacteria. The levanase promoter contains two regions almost identical to the -12, -24 consensus regions present in sigma 54-dependent promoters. The expression of the levanase operon in E. coli was strongly dependent on sigma 54. Taken together, these results suggest that the operon is expressed from a -12, -24 promoter regulated by a sigma 54-like-dependent system in B. subtilis.    We have constructed a chimeric toxin composed of Pseudomonas exotoxin A (PE) and the extracellular ribonuclease of Bacillus amyloliquefaciens, barnase. The chimeric protein, termed PE-Bar, reacted with both anti-PE and anti-barnase antisera and had both ADP ribosylation and ribonuclease activities. The chimeric toxin was cytotoxic to the murine fibroblast cell line L929 and to a murine hybridoma resistant to PE. A mutant form of PE-Bar lacking ADP-ribosylating activity was still cytotoxic to L929 cells. Because treatment of cells prelabeld with [3H]uridine resulted in a decrease in their RNA content, we conclude that this cytotoxic effect was due to the ribonuclease activity of barnase molecules that had been translocated to the cytosol. It is now possible to construct chimeric toxins with two or more enzymatic activities that can be delivered to the cytosol of the target cells.    Sporulation in Bacillus subtilis is a simple developmental system in which a single cell undergoes differentiation to two &apos;sister&apos; cells, namely the prespore and the sporangium. Prespore-specific gene expression is largely dependent on the synthesis of a transcription factor, sigma G. Transcription of spolllG, the gene encoding sigma G, is under precise temporal and spatial control, requiring the products of at least eight genes that are expressed in the pre-divisional cell. Here we show that the product of one of these genes, another sigma factor, sigma F, is by itself sufficient to direct transcription of spolllG in non-sporulating cells. The results indicate that the cell-specificity of prespore gene expression is determined by a mechanism that exerts temporal and spatial control over the activity of sigma F.    The region upstream of the coding sequence of the spoVA operon was studied by several techniques to identify the promoter and to determine the start point for transcription of spoVA. The results of plasmid integration analysis in Bacillus subtilis showed that no more than 119 bp upstream of the coding sequence is needed for expression. A comparison of the sequence of this upstream region with the corresponding sequence from Bacillus licheniformis showed four stretches that were perfectly conserved, interspersed with poorly conserved stretches; the second and third of these conserved stretches appeared to represent the &apos;-35&apos; and &apos;-10&apos; regions of a promoter recognized by RNA polymerase containing sigma G. Primer extension analysis in B. subtilis revealed a spoVA transcript which had apparently initiated 6 bp downstream of the putative &apos;-10&apos; heptanucleotide CATACTA, that is, 27 bp upstream of the coding sequence. This transcript was observed 4 h and 5 h after the initiation of sporulation, but not at earlier times.    The sspB and sspE genes code for major small, acid-soluble proteins of Bacillus subtilis spores and are transcribed during sporulation by RNA polymerase containing sigma G. Analysis of the expression in vivo and the sigma G-dependent transcription in vitro of sspB and sspE genes carrying upstream deletions or point mutations in -10 and -35 promoter regions is consistent with sigma G being the only major transcriptional regulator of these genes. These data also provide information on the residues in -10 and -35 regions which are most important for sigma G recognition.    We present studies on the regulation of a developmental gene (spoIVB) whose product is required at a late stage of morphogenesis during the process of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. Earlier work implicated the spoIVB gene product in a signal-transduction pathway that governs the conversion of pro-sigma K to the mature and active form of the mother cell sigma factor, sigma K, in response to a signal generated within the forespore chamber of the sporangium. We now show that (1) spoIVB is induced at the engulfment stage of sporulation, (2) this transcription is restricted to the forespore, and (3) spoIVB is under the direct control of the forespore sigma factor sigma G. The discovery that spoIVB is a forespore-expressed gene suggests that the spoIVB gene product, or a developmental event under its control, triggers the processing of pro-sigma K and thereby mediates the coupling of sigma K-directed gene expression in the mother cell to sigma G-directed gene expression in the forespore. We also show that spoIVB transcription is partially dependent on the action of the mother cell regulatory gene spoIIID, a finding that suggests that the transcription of certain forespore-expressed genes is influenced by events in the mother cell.    CytA, a 27-kDa cytolytic crystal protein of Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis, is produced only at very low levels by recombinant Escherichia coli cells unless a 20-kDa B. thuringiensis subsp. israelensis protein is also present (K. M. McLean and H. R. Whiteley, J. Bacteriol. 169:1017-1023, 1987; L. F. Adams, J. E. Visick, and H. R. Whiteley, J. Bacteriol. 171:521-530, 1989). However, the data reported here demonstrate that the 20-kDa protein is not required for high-level CytA production in E. coli strains carrying mutations in rpoH, groEL, or dnaK, all of which affect the proteolytic ability of the cells. The 20-kDa protein also increases the amount of CryIVD (another B. thuringiensis subsp. israelensis crystal protein) and LacZX90 (a mutant of beta-galactosidase) made by E. coli. The latter phenomenon is attributable to an increase in the half-life of LacZX90, suggesting that the 20-kDa protein may stabilize this protein. The effect of the 20-kDa protein was also examined in vitro and in a T7 RNA polymerase expression system, and the possible significance of these results for the timing of proteolysis and of 20-kDa protein activity is discussed. Finally, the ability of a single antibody to coimmunoprecipitate CytA and the 20-kDa protein from E. coli extracts provides evidence for a protein-protein interaction that may be related to the mechanism of action of the 20-kDa protein.    In Bacillus subtilis the abrB gene product negatively affects the transcription of some genes activated during the transition from vegetative to stationary phase of growth. Interaction of AbrB with the promoters of two such genes, spoVG, a sporulation gene, and tycA, an antibiotic biosynthesis gene, was studied by DNase I and hydroxyl radical footprinting. Two binding areas within the leader and promoter regions of tycA were identified. In spoVG the binding site is located at the A + T-rich region upstream of the promoter. Hydroxyl radical footprinting revealed that the AbrB-protected regions, in both the tycA and spoVG promoters, are short A + T-rich regions that are separated by one helical turn, indicating that AbrB binds to one face of the helix. To examine the role of spoOA in the expression of abrB-controlled genes, the levels of AbrB protein in Spo + and in spoOA cells were determined by Western blot analysis. In wild-type cells AbrB was detected only during vegetative growth, whereas in spoOA cells a high level of AbrB was detected during both the vegetative and stationary phases of growth. These findings support a model in which (i) spoOA negatively affects abrB expression, and (ii) the repression of the transition state-activated genes tycA and spoVG in spoOA cells is due to constitutive expression of AbrB, which acts as a repressor.    The srfA locus of Bacillus subtilis is defined by a transposon Tn917 insertion and is required for production of the peptide secondary metabolite surfactin. The srfA locus was isolated by cloning the DNA flanking srfA::Tn917 insertions followed by chromosome walking. The cloned region is an operon of over 25 kb which covers the transcription initiation region but not the intact 3&apos; end of srfA. csh-293, which was previously identified as a Tn917lac mutation that impairs competence development and causes a conditional defect in sporulation, was known to be located in the vicinity of the srfA locus within the B. subtilis genome. The csh-293::Tn917lac mutation was discovered to cause a defect in surfactin production and was shown to be located in the srfA operon by its cotransformation with srfA mutations and by Southern hybridization analysis. Insertion mutations in srfA, created by the chromosomal integration of plasmids bearing overlapping srfA DNA fragments, were examined for their effects on surfactin production, competence, and sporulation. All three processes were found to require the intact 5&apos; half of the srfA operon, whereas the 3&apos; half of srfA was found to be required for sporulation and surfactin production but not competence. These experiments show that srfA gene products function in B. subtilis cell specialization and differentiation.    The synthesis and structure of linear multimeric plasmid molecules (hmw DNA) in Bacillus subtilis were investigated. The replication of covalently-closed-circular supercoiled (form I) DNA requires the rate-limiting plasmid-encoded replication initiation protein. Unlike form I, hmw DNA synthesis is partially resistant to inhibition of cellular transcription or translation and requires the host DnaB protein. In addition, hmw DNA synthesis involves host recombination and repair functions (RecE and Poll). Analysis of hmw DNA by electron microscopy displayed linear DNA molecules up to 100 kb in size, which were either single-stranded, double-stranded or double-stranded with single-stranded ends. Structural features of hmw DNA molecules were mapped by means of heteroduplex studies using defined strand-specific probes. The results suggest that a recombination intermediate, but not plasmid-encoded replication, is involved in the initiation of hmw DNA synthesis.    Stage 0 sporulation (spo0) mutants of Bacillus subtilis are defective in the signal transduction system initiating sporulation. Two of the products of these genes, Spo0A and Spo0F, are related to response regulator components of two-component regulatory systems used to control environmental responses in bacteria. The Spo0F response regulator was found to be the primary substrate for phosphorylation by the sporulation-specific protein kinase, KinA. Phosphorylated Spo0F was the phosphodonor for a phosphotransferase, Spo0B, which transferred the phosphate group to the second response regulator, the transcription regulatory protein Spo0A. This phosphorelay provides a mechanism for signal gathering from several protein kinases using Spo0F as a secondary messenger. These divergent signals are integrated through Spo0B phosphotransferase to activate the Spo0A transcription factor. This system provides for many levels of control to prevent capricious induction of sporulation.    The transcriptional regulatory gene spoOH encodes an RNA polymerase sigma factor called sigma H that directs gene expression at an early stage of sporulation in the Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis. We now report that conditions that induce sporulation cause a rapid increase in the cellular concentration of sigma H. This increase could account for the stimulated transcription of certain sigma H-controlled genes at the onset of sporulation. Experiments in which the expression of spoOH was monitored by use of a spoOH-lacZ fusion and in which expression of spoOH was artificially manipulated by use of an isopropyl-beta-D-thiogalacto-side-inducible promoter indicate that sporulation-induced increases in the amount of sigma H are not controlled at the level of the transcription of its structural gene. Rather, we infer the existence of post-transcriptional control mechanisms that govern sigma H levels, and we present evidence suggesting that increases in the amount of sigma H at the start of sporulation are due to increased translation or stability of the spoOH mRNA and, to a lesser extent, decreased turnover of spoOH protein.    Phage SPO1 middle transcripts are known to fall into two classes, m and m1l. Class m1l transcripts continue to be made late in the viral infection, while the synthesis of class m transcripts ceases soon after the onset of replication and late transcription. The experiments that are reported here deal with the regulatory nature of this diversity. The accumulation of transcripts associated with eight middle promoters was analyzed by S1 nuclease mapping. DNA sequence surrounding these middle promoters was determined or redetermined, and the stability of RNA associated with most of these promoters was also analyzed. Class m1l transcription was shown to be associated with SPO1 middle promoters that remain active at late stages of viral development, when middle promoters of class m are repressed. The consensus sequences of class m and m1l middle promoters were found to be indistinguishable and the search for sequences consensual with late promoters yielded only divergent candidates. No other consensus sequence that is specific and exclusive to either class of middle promoters was detected within a hundred base pairs upstream or downstream of these promoters. Considerable variations in the stabilities of SPO1 middle transcripts were found. Two promoters that are only 71 base pairs apart yielded transcripts that had substantially different stabilities. The 5&apos;-flanking segment of the transcript associated with the upstream promoter apparently conferred a high degree of stability on this RNA.    DNA fragments with promoter activity were isolated from the chromosome of Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis. For the isolation, a promoter probe vector based on the cat gene was constructed, which allowed direct selection with chloramphenicol in Bacillus subtilis and L. lactis. Four of the putative promoters (P1, P2, P10, and P21) were analyzed further by sequencing, mapping of the 5&apos; end of the mRNA, Northern (RNA blot) hybridization, and chloramphenicol acetyltransferase activity measurements. From these fragments, -10 and -35 regions resembling the consensus Escherichia coli sigma 70 and B. subtilis sigma 43 promoters were identified. Another set of promoters, together with a signal sequence, were also isolated from the same organism. These fragments promoted secretion of TEM beta-lactamase from L. lactis. When the two sets of promoters were compared, it was found that the ones isolated with the cat vector were more efficient (produced more mRNA). By changing the promoter part of the promoter-signal sequence fragment giving the best TEM beta-lactamase secretion into a more efficient one (P2), a 10-fold increase in enzyme production was obtained.    The putative promoter region of the 16S ribosomal RNA-encoding gene (rRNA) of Mycobacterium leprae was cloned and characterized in Escherichia coli. A 932-bp HaeIII restriction fragment, containing the 5&apos; end of the 16S rRNA gene and flanking upstream region, was cloned in front of a promoterless reporter gene in the shuttle vector, pMH109, to generate the plasmid, pYA1101. This clone exhibits promoter activity both in Gram-(E. coli) and Gram+ (Bacillus subtilis) bacteria. Sequence analysis and primer extension experiments with mRNA derived from the M. leprae clone were used to determine the structure and the location of the promoter, as well as the transcription start point in E. coli. The promoter region contains sequences that resemble the -35 and -10 consensus sequences found in many bacteria. A region located 34 bp distal to the promoter is a putative rRNA processing signal, based on sequence homology with processing signals involved in the maturation of the rRNA precursor in B. subtilis and several Mycoplasma species.    Transcripts of the Clostridium thermocellum endoglucanase genes celF and celD, encoding endoglucanases F and D, respectively, were characterized. The size of the mRNAs was about 2.35 kb for celF and 2.1 kb for celD, indicating monocistronic transcription of both genes. A unique 5&apos; end, located 218 bp upstream from the initiation codon, was found for celF mRNA. No convincing homology could be identified between the sequence upstream from the celF 5&apos; end and other procaryotic promoters. Two 5&apos; ends, located 124 and 294 bp upstream from the initiation codon, were mapped for celD mRNA. The -10 and the -35 sequences preceding the ATG-distal 5&apos; end of celD mRNA were homologous to the consensus sequence of Bacillus subtilis sigma 43 promoters. The sequence upstream from the ATG-proximal 5&apos; end had some similarity with the -10 sequence of B. subtilis sigma 28 promoters. During growth on cellobiose, the 5&apos; end of celD transcripts was found predominantly at the -124 site during the late exponential phase but almost exclusively at the -294 site during the early stationary phase. The kinetics of appearance of celA, celC, celD, and celF mRNA was followed by dot blot analysis. Transcripts of celA, celD, and celF were detected during late exponential and early stationary phase. In contrast, the celC transcript was detected almost exclusively during early stationary phase. Since growth was limited by the availability of cellobiose, the results suggest that the genes are regulated by a mechanism analogous to catabolite repression.    The present study deals with the mechanism by which plasmid pCED3 interferes with the growth of Bacillus subtilis. Plasmid pCED3 was constructed from pUB110 and pBR322 and contains the lacZ gene attached to the B. subtilis tms promoter. Plasmid derivatives that contain mutations in the tms promoter were used to examine the effect of promoter strength on cell growth, plasmid stability, the amount of plasmid DNA per cell and the activities of plasmid-encoded enzymes, i.e., beta-galactosidase and kanamycin nucleotidyltransferase (KNT). Efficient lacZ transcription directed from the tms promoter resulted in reduction in growth rate and plasmid stability without an increase in beta-galactosidase activity. The amount of plasmid DNA varied between 6.6 and 12.9 pmol per mg cell protein and showed no clear correlation with the strength of the tms promoter. Transcription from the tms promoter inhibited the expression of the plasmid-encoded kanamycin resistance gene resulting in the reduction of both beta-galactosidase activity and growth rate in the presence of kanamycin. These results suggest that the negative effect on B. subtilis growth exerted by pCED3 results at least partly from a decrease in kanamycin resistance by plasmid-bearing cells.    In this article we describe the cloning of the xyl regulon encoding xylose utilization from Bacillus licheniformis by complementation of a xyl mutant of B. subtilis. The xylose isomerase encoding gene, xylA, was sequenced and identified by its extensive homology to other xylose isomerases. The expression of xylA is regulated on the level of transcription by a repressor protein encoded by xylR. Its gene has the opposite orientation of xylA and the start codons are 181 bp apart. A deletion of xylR renders xylA expression constitutive. The xylR sequence was determined and is discussed with respect to its homology to other xylR structures. Primer extension analyses of the xylA and xylR transcripts under repressing and including conditions define their promoters and confirm the regulation of xylA transcription. Furthermore, some induction of the xylR transcript by xylose is also observed. The regulatory sequence of both genes consists of a bipolar promoter system and contains three palindromic sequence elements. Their potential functions with respect to xylA and xylR regulation are discussed. The primary structures of the genes, promoters and regulatory sequences are compared to the xyl regulons encoded by B. subtilis, B. megaterium, Staphylococcus xylosus and E. coli. Homology is greatest between the B. subtilis and B. megaterium encoded xyl genes while the B. licheniformis borne genes are clearly more distant. The next greater differences are found to the S. xylosus and the greatest to the E. coli encoded genes. These results are discussed with respect to the taxonomic relations of these bacteria.    Genetic competence develops as a global response of Bacillus subtilis to the onset of stationary phase, in glucose-minimal salts-based media. The onset of competence is accompanied by the expression of several late gene products that are required for the binding, processing and uptake of transforming DNA. A number of regulatory genes have been identified that are needed for the appropriate synthesis of the late gene products. The regulatory gene products include a number of known transcription factors, as well as several members of the bacterial two-component regulatory system. Genetic analysis has suggested a scheme for the flow of regulatory information signalling the onset of competence. Most of these regulatory products appear to be involved in the response to nutritional status, while the components responsible for growth stage and cell-type-specific control remain unknown. The general implications of this scheme for post-exponential expression are discussed.    The sin gene of Bacillus subtilis encodes a dual-function regulatory protein, Sin, which is a negative as well as a positive regulator of alternate developmental processes that are induced at the end of vegetative growth in response to nutrient depletion. Sin has been purified to homogeneity by using a simple two-step procedure. It was found to bind to the developmentally regulated aprE (alkaline protease) gene at two sites in vitro. The stronger Sin-binding site (SBS-1) is located more than 200 bp upstream from the transcription start site. It is required for Sin repression of aprE expression in vivo, as strains bearing SBS-1 deletions were not affected by the sin gene. The second, weaker Sin-binding site lies on a DNA fragment that contains the aprE promoter. Results of DNase I, exonuclease III, and dimethyl sulfate footprinting analysis of SBS-1 suggested that Sin binding involves two adjacent binding sites which appear to contain two different partial dyad symmetries. An analysis of the predicted amino acid sequence of Sin revealed a potential leucine zipper protein dimerization motif which is flanked by two helix-turn-helix motifs that could be involved in recognizing two different dyad symmetries.    The Bacillus spo0H gene codes for sigma H, which, as part of the RNA polymerase holoenzyme E sigma H, is responsible for the transcription of several genes which are expressed at the beginning of the sporulation process. In this communication, we examined the regulation of the spo0H gene of Bacillus subtilis by using lacZ reporter gene assays, quantitative RNA determinations, and Western immunoassay. The expression of the spo0H gene increases as the culture enters the mid-logarithmic stage of growth. This increased expression requires the genes spo0A, spo0B, spo0E, and spo0F, and the requirement for at least spo0A and spo0B can be bypassed when the abrB gene is mutated. The expression of the spo0H gene is constitutive in the presence of the abrB mutation, being expressed at higher levels during vegetative growth. In addition, the sof-1 mutation, in the spo0A structural gene, can bypass the need for spo0F in spo0H expression. The transcriptional start site of spo0H was determined by using RNA made in vivo as well as in vitro. These studies indicate that spo0H is transcribed by the major vegetative RNA polymerase, E sigma A. spo0H RNA and sigma H levels during growth are not identical to each other or to the pattern of expression of spoVG, a gene transcribed by E sigma H. This suggests that spo0H is regulated posttranscriptionally and also that factors in addition to sigma H levels are involved in the expression of genes of the E sigma H regulon.    Gene 6 mRNA of Bacillus subtilis phage phi 29 is inefficiently translated under standard in vitro conditions by Escherichia coli, while it is efficiently translated by the in vitro system derived from B. subtilis. This is a rare example of the inability of E. coli to translate mRNA translated by B. subtilis. The ionic condition in the translation systems was the key component in the differential recognition of the gene 6 message by E. coli and B. subtilis ribosomes. Its translation by E. coli ribosomes was preferentially inhibited by moderate levels of KCl, while its translation by B. subtilis ribosomes was unaffected by these concentrations of salt. This preferential inhibition with E. coli ribosomes was observed in vitro as well as in vivo. While not influencing the general phenomenon of preferential inhibition, anion-specific effects were observed in overall protein synthesis. Glutamate and acetate promoted efficient synthesis over a broad range of concentrations, whereas chloride was inhibitory at all concentrations tested.    Two novel Bacillus subtilis genes that regulate the production of several extracellular enzymes were clones and characterized. These two genes are organized as part of an operon. When cloned in a multicopy plasmid, the first gene (tenA, transcription enhancement) stimulates alkaline protease production at the transcriptional level. The second gene (tenI) exerts an opposite effect to reduce alkaline protease production. The production of neutral protease, levansucrase, and alkaline protease can be stimulated up to 11- to 55-fold. Thus, tenA is a new member of the deg (regulatory genes for degradative enzymes) family in B. subtilis. A functional degS product is required to observe the stimulatory effect from tenA. Between the promoter and the ribosome-binding site of tenA, there exists a terminatorlike structure. Deletion of this structure doubles the expression of tenA. Neither tenA nor tenI is essential for cell growth and the production of extracellular enzymes. However, inactivation of these genes causes a delay in sporulation. This operon is located close to tre on the genetic linkage map. The overall organization of this operon and its relationship with other known regulatory factors in the deg family are discussed.    The gpr gene, which codes for the protease that initiates degradation of small, acid-soluble proteins during spore germination, has been cloned from Bacillus megaterium and Bacillus subtilis, and its nucleotide sequence has been determined. Use of a translational gpr-lacZ fusion showed that the B. subtilis gpr gene was expressed primarily, if not exclusively, in the forespore compartment of the sporulating cell, with expression taking place approximately 1 h before expression of glucose dehydrogenase and ssp genes. gpr-lacZ expression was abolished in spoIIAC (sigF) and spoIIIE mutants but was reduced only approximately 50% in a spoIIIG (sigG) mutant. However, the kinetics of the initial approximately 50% of gpr-lacZ expression were unaltered in a spoIIIG mutant. The in vivo transcription start site of gpr has been identified and found to be identical to the in vitro start site on this gene with either E sigma F or E sigma G. Induction of sigma G synthesis in vivo turned on gpr-lacZ expression in parallel with synthesis of glucose dehydrogenase. These data are consistent with gpr transcription during sporulation first by E sigma F and then by E sigma G.    The xylA and xylB genes of Bacillus subtilis BR151 encoding xylose isomerase and xylulokinase, respectively, were disrupted by gene replacement rendering the constructed mutant strain unable to grow on xylose as the sole carbon source. The Bacillus megaterium encoded xyl genes were cloned by complementation of this strain to xylose utilization. The nucleotide sequence of about 4 kbp of the insertion indicates the presence of the xylA and xylB genes on the complementing plasmid. Furthermore, a regulatory gene, xylR, is located upstream of xylA and has opposite polarity to it. The intergenic region between the divergently oriented reading frames of xylR and xylA contains palindromic sequences of 24 bp spaced by five central bp and 29 bp spaced by 11 bp, respectively, and two promoters with opposite orientation as determined by primer extension analysis. They overlap with one nucleotide of their--35 consensus boxes. Transcriptional fusions of lacZ to xylA, xylB and xylR were constructed and revealed that xylA and xylB are repressed in the absence and can be 200-fold induced in the presence of xylose. The increased level of xylAB mRNA in induced and its absence in repressed cells confirms that this regulation occurs on the level of transcription. Deletion of the xylR gene encoding the Xyl repressor results in constitutive expression of xylAB. The transcription of xylR is autoregulated and can be induced 9-fold by xylose. The mechanism of this regulation is not clear. While the apparent xyl operator palindrome is upstream of the xylR promoter, the potential recognition of another palindrome downstream of this promoter by Xyl repressor is discussed.    Engineered variants of the transposon Tn917 have been widely used to obtain insertion mutations and transcriptional fusions in Bacillus subtilis and other Gram-positive bacteria. We have developed a novel Tn917-based methodology useful for isolation and characterization of mutants resulting from gene over-expression. A Tn917 variant was constructed which contains a strong out-facing promoter near one end, able to promote transcription of genes in the vicinity of its insertion target. This transposon, designated Tn917PF1, was tested in model conditions. Three Tn917PF1 mutants of B. subtilis, with phenotypes presumed to result from gene over-expression, were analysed. Their phenotypes were shown to be due to transcription from the transposon promoter. In one mutant the promoter activated a deg gene, probably degQ. The other two contained different insertions decryptifying a B. subtilis gene encoding beta-galactosidase.    The most common effect of transposon insertion is the inactivation of genes. However, in some cases, transposons can activate in cis the expression of genes in the neighbourhood of their integration site. We previously described an insertion of the transposon Tn917 into the Bacillus subtilis sacXY locus. sacX and sacY encode respectively a negative and a positive regulator involved in induction by sucrose of the exoenzyme levansucrase. Data in this paper show that the Tn917 insertion had two effects: it inactivated sacX and it increased the transcription of sacY. The latter effect involved one or several elements internal to the transposon.    The cell wall protein gene operon of Bacillus brevis 47 has multiple and tandem promoters. The precise locations of the two major promoters (P2 and P3) of the operon were determined by deletion analysis. This together with results of oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis of the promoter regions confirmed that the -35 and -10 sequences of the two promoters proposed previously are essential for their promoter activity. A G + C-rich sequence upstream of the -35 region of P2 and an A-rich sequence upstream of the -35 region of P3 facilitate the transcription from P2 and P3, respectively.    Transcription factor 1 (TF1) is the Bacillus subtilis phage SPO1-encoded member of the family of bacterial DNA-binding proteins that includes Escherichia coli HU and integration host factor (IHF). We have initiated a mutational analysis of the TF1 molecule to understand better its unique DNA-binding properties and to investigate its physiological function. We report here the consequences of mutating the putative DNA-binding &quot;arms&quot; of TF1. At position 61 in its primary sequence, TF1 contains a Phe residue in place of the Arg residue found in all other known members of the HU family. Substituting polar, uncharged residues for Phe61 substantially reduced the DNA-binding affinity and site-selectivity of TF1 in vitro, whereas the substitution of Tyr had no effect. Substituting Trp or Arg for Phe61 had little effect on the affinity of TF1 for SPO1 DNA, but altered the electrophoretic mobilities of protein-DNA complexes in non-denaturing gels. The Arg61 substitution increased the affinity of the protein for non-specific sites on thymine-containing DNA, thus reducing the natural preference of TF1 for (5-hydroxymethyluracil)-containing DNA. The Phe61-to-Arg mutation was also correlated with decreased phage yield and aberrant regulation of viral protein synthesis in vivo.    Acetoacetate decarboxylase (ADC) (EC4.1.1.4) of Clostridium acetobutylicum DSM 792 was purified to homogeneity, and its first 25 N-terminal amino acids were determined. Oligonucleotide probes deduced from this sequence were used to detect positive clones in partial gene banks derived from Sau3A and HaeIII digests with following ligation into the vector pUC9. In Escherichia coli, the 2.1-kbp HaeIII clones expressed high levels of ADC activity. The expression was independent of the orientation of the insert with respect to the lac promoter of the vector and also of the addition of isopropyl-beta-D-thiogalactopyranoside, thus indicating that sequences located on the clostridial DNA controlled transcription and translation. From the E. coli clone with the recombinant plasmid pUG93 containing the 2.1-kbp HaeIII fragment, the ADC protein was purified and compared with the native enzyme. Both were indistinguishable with respect to the molecular mass of subunits and native protein as well as to activity stain. The 2.9-kbp Sau3A fragment could be shown to contain the amino terminus of the acetoacetate decarboxylase (adc) gene but did not express enzyme activity. It partially overlapped with the HaeIII fragment, spanning together 4,053 bp of the clostridial genome that were completely sequenced. Four open reading frames (ORFs) could be detected, one of which was unambiguously assigned to the acetoacetate decarboxylase (adc) gene. Amino acid sequences of the N terminus and the catalytic center as deduced from the nucleotide sequence were identical to sequences obtained from direct analysis of the protein. Typical procaryotic transcriptional and translational start and stop signals could be found in the DNA sequence. Together with these regulatory sequences, the adc gene formed a single operon. The carboxyl terminus of the enzyme proved to be rather hydrophobic. In vitro transcription-translation assays resulted in formation of ADC and ORF3 gene product; the other two ORFs were not expressed. Whereas no homology of the adc gene and ORF2 could be detected with sequences available in the EMBL or GenBank data bases, the obviously truncated ORF1 showed significant similarity to alpha-amylase of Bacillus subtilis. The restriction pattern and N-terminal amino acid sequence (as deduced from the nucleotide sequence) of ORF3 proved to be identical to those of the large subunit of acetoacetyl coenzyme A:acetate/butyrate:coenzyme A transferase.    The glpPKD region of the Bacillus subtilis chromosome was cloned in its natural host in plasmid pHP13. The glpPKD region contains genes required for glycerol catabolism: glpK coding for glycerol kinase, glpD coding for glycerol-3-phosphate (G3P) dehydrogenase and glpP, proposed to code for a positively acting regulatory protein. The cloned 7 kb fragment carries wild-type alleles of glpK, glpD and glpP. It can also complement a strain deleted for the entire glpPKD region. The wild-type alleles were mapped to different subfragments, establishing the gene order glpP-glpK-glpD. The nucleotide sequence of glpK and glpD was determined. Immediately upstream of glpK, an additional open reading frame was found, possibly being part of the same operon. Putative transcription terminators were found in the region between glpK and glpD and downstream of glpD. In a coupled in vitro transcription/translation system, two proteins were found, corresponding in size to those predicted from the deduced amino acid sequences of glycerol kinase and G3P dehydrogenase (54 kDa and 63 kDa, respectively).    Using the transformation-deficient mutant M465, which was previously isolated by means of insertional mutagenesis with plasmid pHV60, a transcription unit comL required for genetic competence of Bacillus subtilis was identified. A chromosomal DNA fragment flanking the inserted pHV60 was isolated and used to screen two different libraries of B. subtilis DNA in phage lambda EMBL4 and lambda EMBL12, respectively. With the aid of six recombinant phages that hybridize with this chromosomal fragment a restriction map of about 23 kb of B. subtilis chromosomal DNA was constructed. Using small adjoining pieces of this chromosomal DNA in Campbell integrations, the size of the transcription unit involved in competence development could be delimited to about 15 kb. By insertion of a promoterless lacZ gene into comL, the transcriptional regulation of comL was analysed and epistatic interactions among various other com genes were determined. The results of these experiments indicated that comL is optimally expressed in glucose-based minimal medium when the culture enters the stationary phase of growth and that the expression of late competence genes is dependent on previous transcription of comL, which in turn is dependent on the gene products of comA and comB.    During sporulation of the Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis, transcription of genes encoding spore coat proteins in the mother-cell compartment of the sporangium is controlled by RNA polymerase containing the sigma subunit called sigma K. Based on comparison of the N-terminal amino acid sequence of sigma K with the nucleotide sequence of the gene encoding sigma K (sigK), the primary product of sigK was inferred to be a pro-protein (pro-sigma K) with 20 extra amino acids at the N terminus. Using antibodies generated against pro-sigma K, we have detected pro-sigma K beginning at the third hour of sporulation and sigma K beginning about 1 hr later. Even when pro-sigma K is expressed artificially during growth and throughout sporulation, sigma K appears at the normal time and expression of a sigma K-controlled gene occurs normally. These results suggest that pro-sigma K is an inactive precursor that is proteolytically processed to active sigma K in a developmentally regulated fashion. Mutations that block forespore gene expression block accumulation of sigma K but not accumulation of pro-sigma K, suggesting that pro-sigma K processing is a regulatory device that couples the programs of gene expression in the two compartments of the sporangium. We propose that this regulatory device ensures completion of forespore morphogenesis prior to the synthesis in the mother-cell of spore coat proteins that will encase the forespore.    Flagella in procaryotes are complex structures requiring the coordinate expression of over 50 genes, including flagellin, the major repeating structural protein. We have previously shown that a functional RpoN gene product is required for expression of flagellin in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAK (P. A. Totten and S. Lory, J. Bacteriol. 172:389-396, 1990) and have now cloned, sequenced, and determined the transcriptional start site of the structural gene for this flagellin. The clones containing this gene produced a protein that reacted on Western immunoblots with polyclonal and four different monoclonal antibodies to purified flagella. However, this flagellin protein in Escherichia coli was slightly smaller (41 kDa) than flagellin protein produced in P. aeruginosa PAK (45 kDa), indicating degradation in E. coli or modification in P. aeruginosa. Comparison of the deduced amino acid sequence of this gene with the amino acid sequences of other flagellins revealed a conservation in the N- and C-terminal domains, suggesting conservation of secretion or assembly signals between these organisms. The sequence 5&apos; of the structural gene contained potential RpoN-specific promoters as well as a promoter sequence recognized by RpoF (sigma 28), the alternative sigma factor required for expression of flagellin genes in E. coli (and Bacillus subtilis). Deletion analysis of the promoter region as well as transcriptional start site mapping implicated the RpoF, and not the RpoN, consensus sequences as the functional promoter for the flagellin gene. Models for the involvement of both RpoN and RpoF in the expression of flagellin in P. aeruginosa are presented.    The sporulation operon spoIIA of Bacillus subtilis consists of three cistrons called spoIIAA, spoIIAB, and spoIIAC. Little is known about the function of spoIIAA and spoIIAB, but spoIIAC encodes a sigma factor called sigma F, which is capable of directing the transcription in vitro of genes that are expressed in the forespore chamber of the developing sporangium. We now report that the products of the spoIIA operon constitute a regulatory system in which SpoIIAA is an antagonist of SpoIIAB (or otherwise counteracts the effect of SpoIIAB) and SpoIIAB is, in turn, an antagonist of SpoIIAC (sigma F). This conclusion is based on the observations that (i) overexpression of spoIIAB inhibits sigma F-directed gene expression, (ii) a mutation in spoIIAB stimulates sigma F-directed gene expression, (iii) a mutation in spoIIAA blocks sigma F-directed gene expression, and (iv) a mutation in spoIIAB relieves the block in sigma F-directed gene expression caused by a mutation in spoIIAA. The SpoIIAA/SpoIIAB/SpoIIAC regulatory system could play a role in controlling the timing of sigma F-directed gene expression and/or could be responsible for restricting sigma F-directed gene expression to the forespore chamber of the sporangium.    Plasmid pPS96 was used to disrupt the genomic region immediately upstream of pcbC in C. acremonium by homologous integration. Approximately 4% of the C. acremonium transformants obtained with pPS96 were unable to produce beta-lactam antibiotics. All transformants obtained with other plasmids and isolates which had not been exposed to transforming DNA retained the ability to produce beta-lactams. Enzyme analysis showed that ACV synthetase activity was missing in the beta-lactam-minus pPS96 transformants. Southern copies of pPS96 in all beta-lactam-minus transformants analyzed. However, predictable alterations of the targeted region were not detected. Transformation of antibiotic-minus transformants with plasmid pZAZ4, carrying a wild-type copy of the region targeted for disruption, resulted in restoration of the ability to produce beta-lactams in greater than 80% of the transformants recovered. Location of the pcbAB gene upstream from pcbC was confirmed by comparing the amino acid sequence of internal peptides from purified ACV synthetase with that deduced from the DNA sequence of the region targeted for disruption. The direction of transcription of the pcbAB gene is opposite that of the pcbC gene. Further analysis of amino acid sequence data from ACV synthetase revealed regions of strong similarity with the peptide synthetases responsible for production of tyrocidine and gramicidin S in Bacillus brevis.    A crystal protein gene of Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. kurstaki HD-1-Dipel is transcribed in vivo from two overlapping promoters that are activated at different times during sporulation. We reported earlier (K. L. Brown and H. R. Whiteley, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85:4166-4170, 1988) that an RNA polymerase containing a sigma subunit with an apparent Mr of 35,000 can transcribe in vitro from the promoter utilized from early to midsporulation. We now report the isolation of an RNA polymerase containing a sigma subunit with an Mr of ca. 28,000; this polymerase activates transcription in vitro from the promoter used from mid- to late sporulation. This form of RNA polymerase also directs transcription in vitro from promoters preceding two other crystal protein genes and a gene coding for a spore coat protein. On the basis of a comparison of the four promoters, we propose the following consensus sequence for the -10 region recognized by RNA polymerase containing the Mr-28,000 sigma subunit: 5&apos;-TNATANNaTGag-3&apos;. No consensus sequence could be derived for the -35 region. When the N-terminal amino acid sequence of the sigma 28 polypeptide was aligned with the amino acid sequences of known sigma subunits, significant homology was found with the N terminus of the mature form of the sigma K subunit of RNA polymerase isolated from sporulating cells of Bacillus subtilis.    Bleomycin is an antitumor agent whose activity has long been thought to derive from its ability to degrade DNA. Recent findings suggest that cellular RNA may be a therapeutically relevant locus. At micromolar concentrations, Fe(II)-bleomycin readily cleaved a Bacillus subtilis tRNAHis precursor in a highly selective fashion, but Escherichia coli tRNA(Tyr) precursor was largely unaffected even under more forcing conditions. Other substrates included an RNA transcript encoding a large segment of the reverse transcriptase from human immunodeficiency virus 1. RNA cleavage was oxidative, approximately 10-fold more selective than DNA cleavage, and largely unaffected by nonsubstrate RNAs. RNA sequence analysis suggested recognition of RNA tertiary structure, rather than recognition of specific sequences; subsets of nucleotides at the junction of single- and double-stranded regions were especially susceptible to cleavage. The ready accessibility of cellular RNAs to xenobiotic agents, the high selectivity of bleomycin action on RNAs, and the paucity of mechanisms for RNA repair suggest that RNA may be a therapeutically relevant target for bleomycin.    Ribonuclease P RNA is the catalytic moiety of the ribonucleoprotein enzyme that removes precursor sequences from 5&apos;-ends of pre-tRNAs. A photoaffinity cross-linking agent was coupled to the substrate phosphate on which RNase P acts and used to map nucleotides in the vicinity of the catalytic site of this ribozyme. Mature tRNA(Phe) containing a 5&apos;-thiophosphate was synthesized by transcription in vitro using phage T7 RNA polymerase in the presence of guanosine 5&apos;-phosphorothioate. The photoagent (azidophenacyl) was coupled uniquely to the 5&apos;-thiophosphate of the tRNA, the site of action by RNase P. The photoagent-containing tRNA binds to RNase P RNA and is cross-linked by UV irradiation to it at high efficiency (10-30%). Cross-linked conjugates are enzymatically inactive, consistent with the occupancy of the active site of the RNase P RNA by the tRNA. Reversal of the cross-link by phenylmercuric acetate restores activity. The sites of cross-linking in RNase P RNA were determined by primer extension. In order to identify generalities and detect idiosyncrasies, analyses were carried out using RNase P RNAs from three phylogenetically diverse organisms: Bacillus subtilis, Chromatium vinosum and Escherichia coli. In the context of a phylogenetic structure model, two regions of cross-linking are observed in all three RNAs. Two of the RNAs cross-link to a lesser extent at a third structural region and one of the RNAs is cross-linked to a small extent to a fourth region. All the sites of cross-linking between the substrate phosphate in tRNA and the RNase P RNAs are in the conserved core of the structure model, consistent with the importance of the cross-linked residues to the action of this RNA enzyme.    The defective prophage of Bacillus subtilis 168, PBSX, is a chromosomally based element which encodes a non-infectious phage-like particle with bactericidal activity. PBSX is induced by agents which elicit the SOS response. In a PBSX thermoinducible strain which carries the xhi1479 mutation, PBSX is induced by raising the growth temperature from 37 degrees C to 48 degrees C. A 1.2-kb fragment has been cloned which complements the xhi1479 mutation. The nucleotide sequence of this fragment contains an open reading frame (ORF) which encodes a protein of 113 amino acids (aa). This aa sequence resembles that of other bacteriophage repressors and suggests that the N-terminal region forms a helix-turn-helix motif, typical of the DNA-binding domain of many bacterial regulatory proteins. The ORF is preceded by four 15-bp direct repeats, each of which contains an internal palindromic sequence, and by sequences resembling a SigA-dependent promoter. The nt sequence of an equivalent fragment from the PBSX thermoinducible strain has also been determined. There are three aa differences within the ORF compared to the wild type, one of which lies within the helix-turn-helix segment. This ORF encodes a repressor protein of PBSX.    The expression of Bacillus subtilis phage phi 29 late genes from the A3 promoter requires the viral protein p4. This protein is a transcriptional activator which binds to a region of the A3 promoter located between nucleotides -56 to -102, relative to the transcription start point. Mutants at the N terminus of protein p4 have been constructed and their function investigated. The binding of these deletion mutants to the late A3 promoter has been analyzed by gel retardation and DNase I footprinting assays. The results indicate that the N terminus of protein p4 could be involved in its binding to the A3 promoter, suggesting that it may not be a typical Cro-like helix-turn-helix DNA-binding protein.    The secondary RNA polymerase sigma factor sigma H is essential for endospore development in Bacillus subtilis. However, only a few promoters that are used by RNA polymerase containing sigma H (E sigma H) have been identified. We used in vitro transcription of random cloned fragments of B. subtilis chromosomal DNA to identify a promoter that is used by E sigma H. This promoter is active before the onset of sporulation.    A 2641-bp EcoRI fragment of DNA that encodes the C-terminal part of the dihydrolipoyl acetyltransferase (E2) component and the dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase (E3) component of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex of Bacillus stearothermophilus has been cloned in Escherichia coli. Its nucleotide sequence was determined. A 705-bp truncated open reading frame was located at the 5&apos;end of the insert which, together with the 588-bp truncated open reading frame at the 3&apos; end of another EcoRI fragment of B. stearothermophilus DNA previously cloned and sequenced [Hawkins, C. F., Borges, A. &amp; Perham, R. N. (1990) Eur. J. Biochem. 191, 337-446], was identified as the gene, pdhC, encoding the E2 polypeptide chain. Direct sequence analysis of the purified E2 chain confirmed that the two EcoRI fragments are adjoining in the B. stearothermophilus genome. The E3 gene, pdhD, begins just 4 bp downstream from the stop codon of the pdhC gene. The amino acid sequences deduced from the pdhC and pdhD genes correspond to proteins of 427 amino acids (E2, Mr 46,265) and 469 amino acids (E3, Mr 49,193), respectively. Both genes are preceded by potential ribosome-binding sites and the E3 gene is followed by a stemloop structure characteristic of rho-independent transcription terminators. The B. stearothermophilus E2 and E3 chains exhibit substantial sequence similarity with the corresponding subunits of other 2-oxo-acid dehydrogenase multienzyme complexes. The cloning and sequence analysis described here complete the description of the gene cluster (pdhA, B, C and D) which encodes the B. stearothermophilus pyruvate dehydrogenase multienzyme complex.    Programmed gene expression during the process of endospore formation in Bacillus subtilis is governed by the successive appearance of five developmental sigma factors. These sigma factors are encoded by genes in which mutations arrest sporulation at a defined stage. These genes are turned on sequentially and depend for their own transcription on the activity of a previously synthesized sigma factor. Superimposed on the regulation of synthesis of the sigma factors are post-transcriptional control mechanisms that couple the activation of the developmental sigma factors to the course of sporulation. Here we review evidence indicating that these developmental transcription factors comprise a regulatory cascade in the order sigma H----sigma F----sigma E----sigma G----sigma K in which the activity of each sigma factor depends on the action of the preceding sigma factor in the cascade.    We have cloned and characterized the mtr operon of Bacillus subtilis. This operon encodes a presumed RNA-binding regulatory protein that is required for attenuation control of the trp operon. We have shown that the mtr operon consists of two structural genes, mtrA and mtrB, predicted to encode 22-kDa and 8-kDa polypeptides, respectively. MtrB shows homology with RegA, an RNA-binding regulatory protein of bacteriophage T4. The lesions in several mtr mutants were localized to mtrB or the putative mtr promoter. Several mtrB alleles were dominant to mtr+, suggesting that the regulatory factor is a multimeric protein. The in vivo action of the mtrA and mtrB gene products was analyzed in an E. coli strain containing a trpE-lacZ gene fusion under control of the B. subtilis trp promoter/attenuator region. Both MtrA and MtrB were necessary for regulation of beta-galactosidase production.    Inducible cat and erm genes are regulated by translational attenuation. In this regulatory model, gene activation results from chloramphenicol- or erythromycin-dependent stalling of a ribosome at a precise site in the leader region of cat or erm transcripts. The stalled ribosome is believed to destabilize a downstream region of RNA secondary structure that sequesters the ribosome-binding site for the cat or erm coding sequence. Here we show that the ribosome stall sites in cat and erm leader mRNAs, designated crb and erb, respectively, are largely complementary to an internal sequence in 16S rRNA of Bacillus subtilis. A tetracycline resistance gene that is likely regulated by translational attenuation also contains a sequence in its leader mRNA, trb, which is complementary to a sequence in 16S rRNA that overlaps with the crb and erb complements. An in vivo assay is described which is designed to test whether 16S rRNA of a translating ribosome can interact with the crb sequence in mRNA in an inducer-dependent reaction. The assay compares the growth rate of cells expressing crb-86 with the growth rate of cells lacking crb-86 in the presence of subinhibitory levels of inducers of cat-86, chloramphenicol, fluorothiamphenicol, amicetin, or erythromycin. Under these conditions, crb-86 retarded growth. Deletion of the crb-86 sequence, insertion of ochre mutations into crb-86, or synonymous codon changes in crb-86 that decreased its complementarity with 16S rRNA all eliminated from detection inducer-dependent growth retardation. Lincomycin, a ribosomally targeted antibiotic that is not an inducer of cat-86, failed to selectively retard the growth of cells expressing crb-86.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    The decay of the polycistronic Bacillus subtilis sdh mRNA was analysed using probes specific for each of the component cistrons, sdhC, sdhA and sdhB. In exponentially growing cells, the entire sdh mRNA seems to decay with an &apos;all or nothing&apos; mechanism and with a uniform half-life of 2-3 min for all cistrons. In stationary-phase cells, the half-life of the 5&apos;-part had dropped to about 0.6 min whereas that of the 3&apos;-part was about 1.2 min. Decay of sdh mRNA was also measured in exponentially growing cells containing a &apos;down-mutation&apos; in the ribosomal binding site preceding sdhC which decreases the expression of sdhC by about 90%. The mutation has a moderate effect on expression of the downstream cistron sdhA. In this mutant, the half-life of the 5&apos;-part of sdh mRNA was about 0.5 min (i.e. the same as in stationary phase wild-type cells) and the half-life of the 3&apos;-part about 1.3 min. Also, analysis of the decay of an sdh-cat fusion transcript revealed that the sdh (5&apos;) part decayed more rapidly than the cat part and this difference was more pronounced in stationary-phase cells compared to exponentially growing cells. The results of these experiments demonstrate the importance of the 5&apos;-segment of sdh mRNA in controlling the stability of the transcript under different growth conditions.    In this study we compared the cellular concentrations and stability of the mRNA transcribed from the aprE (subtilisin) gene (a gene preferentially expressed in stationary growth phase) with those of a vegetative mRNA, succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) mRNA. The subtilisin transcript was shown to be at least 3 times more stable in early stationary phase than it is 2 hr further into stationary phase. When cells were shifted from maximum expression of the subtilisin transcript in stationary phase to physiological conditions, which allowed for the resumption of vegetative growth, the cellular concentration of the subtilisin mRNA decreased rapidly. We conclude that mRNA degradation is one of the means by which the cellular concentrations of the SDH and subtilisin transcripts are adjusted in response to growth stage.    The rpsD gene, encoding ribosomal protein S4, was isolated from Bacillus subtilis by hybridization with oligonucleotide probes derived from the S4 amino-terminal protein sequence. Sequence analysis of the cloned DNA indicated that rpsD is likely to be monocistronic, in contrast to Escherichia coli rpsD, which is located in the alpha operon and is the translational regulator for alpha operon ribosomal protein gene expression in E. coli. The cloned gene was shown to map at position 263 degrees on the B. subtilis chromosome, at the position to which mutations conferring alterations in the electrophoretic mobility of protein S4 were localized. A promoter was identified upstream of the rpsD coding sequence; initiation of transcription at this promoter would result in a transcript containing a leader region 180 bases in length. Immediately downstream of the rpsD coding region were two sequences resembling transcriptional terminators. An open reading frame homologous to tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase (tyrS) genes was identified downstream of rpsD but in the opposite orientation. The leader region of rpsD mRNA is predicted to have extensive secondary structure, resembling a region of B. subtilis 16S rRNA where S4 is likely to bind; similar mRNA features have been found to be important in ribosomal gene regulation in E. coli. These results provide the first steps toward analysis of the regulation of rpsD gene expression in B. subtilis.    To promote more efficient synthesis of heterologous gene products in a Bacillus subtilis host, we have developed a system for rapidly testing the effect of a putative terminator on in vivo gene expression. Terminator structures from the Bacillus amyloliquefaciens amyE gene, the Bacillus licheniformis penP gene, the B. subtilis bglS gene, and the Bacillus thuringiensis cry gene were subcloned and inserted into a vector in such a way as to disrupt expression of the cat-86 gene. Comparisons are made between gene expression levels and the stabilities of the respective stem-loop structures.    Bacillus subtilis sigma-B is an alternate sigma factor implicated in controlling stationary-phase gene expression. We characterized the genetic organization and regulation of the region containing the sigma-B structural gene (sigB) to learn which metabolic signals and protein factors govern sigma-B function. sigB lay in an operon with four open reading frames (orfs) in the order orfV-orfW-sigB-orfX, and lacZ gene fusions showed that all four frames were translated in vivo. Experiments with primer extension, S1 nuclease mapping, and lacZ transcriptional fusions found that sigB operon transcription initiated early in stationary phase from a site 32 nucleotides upstream of orfV and terminated 34 nucleotides downstream of orfX. Fusion expression was abolished in a strain carrying an in-frame deletion in sigB, suggesting that sigma-B positively regulated its own synthesis, and deletions in the sigB promoter region showed that sequences identical to the sigma-B-dependent ctc promoter were essential for promoter activity. Fusion expression was greatly enhanced in a strain carrying an insertion mutation in orfX, suggesting that the 22-kilodalton (kDa) orfX product was a negative effector of sigma-B expression or activity. Notably, the genetic organization of the sigB operon was strikingly similar to that of the B. subtilis spoIIA operon, which has the gene order spoIIAA-spoIIAB-spoIIAC, with spoIIAC encoding the sporulation-essential sigma-F. The predicted sequence of the 12-kDa orfV product was 32% identical to that of the 13-kDa SpoIIAA protein, and the 18-kDa orfW product was 27% identical to the 16-kDa SpoIIAB protein. On the basis of this clear evolutionary conservation, we speculate these protein pairs regulate their respective sigma factors by a similar molecular mechanism and that the spoIIA and sigB operons might control divergent branches of stationary-phase gene expression.    The nucleotide sequence of the Bacillus subtilis pheST genes coding for the 2 subunits of phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase has been determined. The pheS gene corresponds to 1029 bp and the pheT gene to 2412 bp. The encoded proteins have Mrs of 38,947 (343 amino acids, alpha-subunit) and 87,916 (804 amino acids, beta-subunit), respectively. The genes are adjacent on the chromosome separated by only 15 nucleotides. The pheT gene is immediately followed by a hairpin structure typical of a rho-independent transcription terminator. S1 nuclease mapping and primer extension analysis of pheST mRNA revealed a major start of transcription 318 nucleotides upstream of the pheS gene, and 6 nucleotides downstream of a E sigma 43 promoter consensus sequence. Within the 5&apos;-noncoding region several potential secondary structures have been noted.    The minimal region encoding the Corynebacterium glutamicum threonine synthase structural gene and its promoter was mapped by deletion analysis and complementation of the C. glutamicum thrC allele to a 1.6 kb region of the recombinant plasmid pFS80. The nucleotide sequence of this and flanking DNA was determined. The transcription and translation start points were identified by S1 mapping analysis and amino-terminal protein sequencing, respectively. The thrC gene encodes a 54481-Dalton polypeptide product. Translation of the thrC mRNA initiates only six nucleotides downstream from transcription. The length of the mRNA transcript is consistent with a single gene transcription unit. The C. glutamicum thrC gene is expressed independently of the other threonine-specific genes hom and thrB.    To find out whether Escherichia coli heat shock promoters are recognized in Bacillus subtilis, the regulatory regions including the heat shock promoters of the main heat shock genes dnaKJ, lon, groES, and htpG were fused to the indicator genes lacZ and cat. Whereas all transcriptional fusions were expressed in E. coli at low temperature and transient increases of beta-galactosidase activity could be measured at the inducing temperature, no enzymatic activity was found in B. subtilis. This indicates that E. coli heat shock promoters are nonfunctional in B. subtilis.    The recognition of promoter region -10 nucleotide sequences in prokaryotes is believed to be mediated by a segment of alpha-helix in a region of RNA polymerase sigma factors called 2.4. Earlier genetic studies implicated Thr-100 in region 2.4 of the Bacillus subtilis sigma factor sigma H in the recognition of the G.C base pair at position -13 in the -10 region (GAAT) of a cognate promoter. In confirmation of this assignment, we now show that a change-of-specificity mutant of sigma H in which Thr-100 was replaced with isoleucine suppresses a G.C----A.T nucleotide substitution at position -13 but not other &quot;promoter down mutations&quot; (causing impaired promoter activity) at positions -13, -12, and -11. We also show that a loss-of-contact mutant created by the replacement of Thr-100 with alanine (having a short side chain) enables sigma H to tolerate three different promoter down mutations at position -13 but not down mutations at other positions. Finally, we suggest the identification of an additional amino acid involved in base-pair recognition by the demonstration that the replacement of Arg-96 with alanine specifically suppresses an A.T----G.C promoter down mutation at position -12. The identification of amino acids that are four residues apart that are involved in the recognition of adjacent base pairs may fix the orientation of region 2.4 (its NH2 terminus being proximal to the promoter transcription start site) and is consistent with a model in which the recognition of promoter region -10 nucleotide sequences is mediated by an alpha-helix in which residues involved in base-pair contact are separated by one turn and clustered on one face of the helix.    5&apos;-Phosphoribosyl-5-aminoimidazole-4-N-succinocarboxamide synthetase (EC 6.3.2.6), encoded by the purC gene of Escherichia coli K-12, catalyzes the synthesis of 5&apos;-phosphoribosyl-5-aminoimidazole-4-N-succinocarboxamide from 5&apos;-phosphoribosyl-5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxylic acid. The mature protein, as deduced from the purC structural gene sequence, contains 237 amino acids and has a calculated Mr of 26,998. The control region of the purC gene was identified by primer extension mapping of the 5&apos; end of the purC mRNA. The purC control region contains a binding site for and is regulated by the purine repressor, the product of the purR gene. An unusual feature of the 5&apos; untranslated region of the purC mRNA is the presence of a repetitive extragenic palindrome sequence normally found in intercistronic or 3&apos; untranslated regions. The DNA sequence was extended 1.281 kilobases upstream of the purC structural gene and overlapped with the previously determined dapA sequence. Termination of transcription from the dapA-purC intercistronic region may occur within the -35 region of the purC control region. The purC gene has been positioned on the E. coli restriction map and is transcribed in a counterclockwise direction.    In vivo transcription of the replication region of plasmid pE194 yeidls two classes of mRNAs that encode Cop and RepF proteins, respectively. These transcripts are oriented 5&apos; to 3&apos; exclusively in the clockwise direction on the standard map. The cop region contains an open reading frame capable of encoding a 55-amino-acid protein that was demonstrated electrophoretically as a 6-kilodalton product synthesized in Bacillus subtilis minicells and chemically by N-terminal sequencing of a 116-kilodalton fusion protein with Escherichia coli beta-galactosidase. Four transcripts derived from the repF region were found, of which the longest, approximately 720 nucleotides, had the length, orientation, and transcription start site necessary to code for the full-length RepF protein (216 amino acid residues), deduced from the DNA sequence. The 5&apos; ends of the shorter repF transcripts fall within the repF open reading frame. We propose that (i) cop specifies a protein rather than an RNA countertranscript, (ii) the Cop protein functions as a negative-acting element in pE194 replication by regulating synthesis of both RepF and of itself, and (iii) increased plasmid copy number can be explained in terms of cop region mutations that either reduce the intrinsic activity of Cop protein or the rate of its synthesis.    The presence of a second SigH promoter in the sigA operon of Bacillus subtilis was demonstrated by use of a promoter probe plasmid, a sigH deletion mutant, primer extension studies, and in vitro transcription with E sigma H holoenzyme. Both SigH promoters were expressed at low levels even during the growth phase but were expressed at higher levels during the early stationary phase. Expression from the upstream SigH promoter allowed the expression of both dnaE and sigA genes; however, expression from the downstream SigH promoter, which was located in the ribosome-binding site of the dnaE gene, resulted only in the expression of the sigA gene, since the truncated dnaE ribosome-binding site could not be used for initiating translation. Thus, promoter switching during the early stationary phase resulted not only in expression from SigH promoters but also in differential expression of the genes in the sigA operon.    By prophage transformation and subcloning, we have obtained Bacillus subtilis DNA fragments that could complement the hypersensitivity of ada (adaptive response deficient) mutants to N-methyl-N&apos;-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG). The nucleotide sequence contained two open reading frames that were assigned to the genes adaA and adaB, encoding methylphosphotriester-DNA methyltransferase and O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase, respectively. These two genes overlap by 11 bp and comprise a small operon. The 1.6 Kb transcripts derived from the operon were detected in ada+ cells cultured in the presence of MNNG but not in control ada+ cells. From analysis of the syntheses of DNA alkyltransferases in the ada mutant cells harboring the plasmid carrying the complete or partial fragment, we conclude that the adaA gene product functions as a transcriptional activator of the ada operon, while the adaB gene product specializes in repair of mutagenic O6-methylguanine residues. Comparison with Escherichia coli ada operon showed that the two genes correspond to portions of the E. coli ada gene, implicating gene fusion or splitting as the origin of the difference in the organizations of the genes.    The genes for presumably all the tRNA species in Mycoplasma capricolum, a derivative of Gram-positive eubacteria, have been cloned and sequenced. There are 30 genes encoding 29 tRNA species. This number is the smallest in all the known genetic systems except for mitochondria. The sequences of 9 tRNA genes of them have been previously reported (1-3). Twenty-two genes are organized in 5 clusters consisting of nine, five, four and two genes (2 sets), respectively. The other eight genes exist as a single transcription unit. All the tRNAs are encoded each by a single gene, except for the occurrence of two tRNA(Lys)(TTT) genes. The arrangement of tRNA genes in the 9-gene cluster, the 5-gene cluster, the 4-gene cluster and one of the 2-gene clusters reveals extensive similarity with a part of the 21-tRNA gene cluster and/or the 16-tRNA gene cluster in Bacillus subtilis, respectively. The results suggest that the present M. capricolum tRNA genes have evolved from large tRNA gene clusters in the ancestral Gram-positive bacterial genome common to M. capricolum and B. subtilis, by discarding genes for redundant as well as non-obligate tRNAs, so that all the codons may be translated by as small a number of tRNAs as possible.    alpha,alpha-Trehalase (EC 3.2.1.28), an intrinsic protein of intestinal brush-border membranes, was purified to homogeneity from rabbits. Partial amino acid sequences were determined. Two degenerate oligonucleotides based on the sequence of a CNBr peptide were employed in a polymerase chain reaction to amplify a 71-base pair fragment of trehalase DNA with rabbit intestine cDNA as a starting template. This fragment was used as a hybridization probe to isolate full length trehalase clones from a rabbit intestine cDNA bank. Sequence analysis revealed that trehalase comprises 578 amino acids, contains at the amino terminus a typical cleavable signal sequence, at the carboxyl terminus a rather hydrophobic region typical of proteins anchored via glycosylphosphatidylinositol, and four potential N-glycosylation sites. Trehalase has no sequence homologies with other sequenced brush-border glycosidases. Northern blot analysis revealed a 1.9-kilobase trehalase mRNA in small intestine and kidney, smaller amounts in liver, and none in lung. Southern blot analysis indicated the gene has a length of 20 kilobase pairs or less. Injection into Xenopus laevis oocytes of mRNA synthesized in vitro from a trehalase template resulted in the expression of trehalase activity several hundredfold above background. The trehalase activity was membrane-bound and could be solubilized upon digestion with phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C from Bacillus thuringiensis. This strongly suggests that rabbit small intestinal trehalase is anchored via glycosylphosphatidylinositol also when expressed in X. laevis oocytes.    Both the neutral protease gene (nprS) and its transcriptional activator gene (nprA) from Bacillus stearothermophilus TELNE were cloned in Bacillus subtilis by using pTB53 as a vector plasmid. The presence of the nprA gene enhanced protease synthesis by about fivefold. The nucleotide sequences of nprS and its flanking regions were determined. nprS was composed of 1,653 base pairs and 551 amino acid residues. A Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequence was found 9 bases upstream from the translation start site (ATG). The deduced amino acid sequence was very similar to that of another thermostable neutral protease gene, nprM (M. Kubo and T. Imanaka, J. Gen. Microbiol. 134:1883-1892, 1988). the amino acid sequence of the extracellular neutral protease NprS was completely identical to that of NprM. By deletion analysis and substitution of the original promoter with a foreign promoter, it was found that the nprA gene existed upstream of nprS. It was also found that a possible target region (palindromic sequence) of the gene product of nprA existed near the promoter sequence of nprS. The nucleotide sequences of nprA and its flanking regions were determined. The DNA sequence revealed only one large open reading frame, composed of 1,218 base pairs (406 amino acids; molecular weight, 49,097). The SD sequence was found 4 bases upstream from the translation start site (GTG). A possible promoter sequence (TTGAAG for the -35 region and AATTTT for the -10 region) was also found about 20 bases upstream of the SD sequence. The nprA gene was separated from nprS by a typical terminator sequence.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    The aconitase (citB) gene of Bacillus subtilis is repressed during growth in a medium that contains a rapidly metabolizable carbon source and a source of 2-ketoglutarate. It is derepressed when either of these nutrient sources becomes limiting. Repression by rapidly metabolizable carbon sources was shown previously to depend at least in part on a DNA sequence located 67 to 84 base pairs upstream of the start point of citB transcription. In the present work, this region and surrounding DNA were mutagenized to identify more precisely the target for carbon catabolite repression. Mutations in a symmetric sequence located between positions -73 and -59 led to constitutive transcription from the citB promoter in media that normally provoke catabolite repression. By gel mobility shift assays, it was shown that at least one protein in extracts of B. subtilis binds to the symmetric sequence and that DNA of constitutive mutants binds to this protein much less effectively. A second sequence located near position -45 was also implicated in this regulation. A second form of regulation of citB was also investigated. This gene is known to be derepressed when cells are induced to sporulate by exhaustion of a nutrient broth medium or limitation of guanine nucleotide synthesis. The mutations that led to constitutivity with respect to the carbon source had no effect on citB expression in nutrient broth medium, indicating that control by catabolite repression and control by components of nutrient broth (presumably amino acids) act by different mechanisms.    The first enzymes of the histidine (hut) and proline degradative pathways, histidase and proline oxidase, could not be induced in Bacillus subtilis cells growing in glucose minimal medium containing a mixture of 16 amino acids. Addition of the 16-amino-acid mixture to induced wild-type cells growing in citrate minimal medium repressed histidase synthesis 25- to 250-fold and proline oxidase synthesis 16-fold. A strain containing a transcriptional fusion of the hut promoter to the beta-galactosidase gene was isolated from a library of Tn917-lacZ transpositions. Examination of histidase and beta-galactosidase expression in extracts of a hut-lacZ fusion strain grown in various media showed that induction, catabolite repression, and amino acid repression of the hut operon were mediated at the level of transcription. This result was confirmed by measurement of the steady-state level of hut RNA in cells grown in various media. Since amino acid repression was not defective in B. subtilis mutants deficient in nitrogen regulation of glutamine synthetase and catabolite repression, amino acid repression appears to be mediated by a system that functions independently of these regulatory systems.    The ermC gene confers resistance to MLS antibiotics in a Bacillus subtilis host. Synthesis of the ermC gene product, a ribosomal RNA methylase, is inducible by the addition of subinhibitory concentrations of erythromycin. Regulation of ermC gene expression occurs at the post-transcriptional level in three ways: translational attenuation, translational autoregulation, and messenger RNA stabilization.    An efficient system to control the expression of cloned genes in Bacillus subtilis was established by introducing the Escherichia coli bacteriophage lambda cI857 repressor-pR promoter system into this host. A staphylokinase reporter gene (sak42D), which was fused to the lambda pR promoter was constitutively expressed in B. subtilis even when the cI857 gene was present on the same plasmid. S1 nuclease mapping of the transcription start point confirmed that the pR promoter was active in B. subtilis. Constitutive expression under pR-control in B. subtilis was, therefore, likely to result from a lack of repressor formation caused by the inefficiency of cI857 expression signals in the Gram+ host. This lack of repressor synthesis was overcome by fusing the cI857 gene to sak42D transcription and translation signals which have previously been shown to function efficiently in B. subtilis. Plasmids carrying the cI857 gene together with an alpha-amylase-encoding gene (amy) under pR-control mediated temperature-inducible amy expression at 37 degrees C and 42 degrees C. The high repression factor (greater than or equal to 1400) was comparable to the OR efficiencies reported in E. coli.    Endogenous chromosomal DNA amplifications with associated tetracycline resistance (Tcr) in Bacillus subtilis were first described by C. R. Wilson and A. E. Morgan (J. Bacteriol. 163:445-453, 1985). We have confirmed and extended their results, and we show that fusion of protoplasts from Tcs B. subtilis 168 trpC2 with polyethylene glycol and regeneration on medium containing 20 micrograms of tetracycline per ml induces Tcr regenerants that contain amplified DNA. This phenomenon appeared to be recE dependent and requires the addition of polyethylene glycol. Along with three regenerants kindly provided by Wilson and Morgan (RAD1, RAD6, and RAD7), we characterized three strains (CLI20, CLI22, CLI30) isolated in this laboratory. All six contain an amplified region of DNA which was independently cloned on plasmid pCIS7. Integration of pCIS7 into the wild-type (Tcs) B. subtilis chromosome and amplification of the plasmid sequences generated a Tcr phenotype, even though the DNA on pCIS7 was cloned from Tcs B. subtilis KS162 (Ives and Bott, J. Bacteriol. 171:1801-1810, 1989). The amplified DNA also showed homology (through hybridization analysis) with pAM alpha 1 delta 1, a gram-positive Tcr plasmid, indicating that B. subtilis normally contains a silent integrated copy of the gene whose amplification confers Tcr. The amplifications were determined to lie between purA and gyrB on the B. subtilis chromosome, and the endpoints were mapped. RAD6 and CLI30 may share the same left-hand endpoint, but the other endpoints are different in each isolate. The amplified DNAs of RAD1, RAD6, CLI20, and CLI30 end near known DNA membrane binding sites.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    The Bacillus subtilis small cytoplasmic RNA (scRNA) is the structural homologue of both the RNA component of the eukaryotic signal recognition particle (SRP) and the Escherichia coli 4.5S RNA, and it can complement the essential function of the latter RNA in vivo. In the course of characterization of the single-copy scRNA gene locus (scr) we identified an open reading frame, termed ORF17, upstream from scr that encodes an acidic 17 kDa protein of unknown function. This analysis involved DNA sequencing, monitoring expression of transcriptional and translational ORF17-cat and ORF17-lacZ fusions, respectively, and purification and sequencing of the ORF17-lacZ fusion protein. Apparently, transcription of ORF17 proceeds into scr. A small portion of the 17 kDa protein shows homology to deoxycytidylate (DCMP) deaminase of bacteriophagphage T2, but no similarity exists to the sequenced SRP-polypeptides or any other known protein sequences.    Little is known about c-type cytochromes in Gram-positive bacteria in contrast to the wealth of information available on this type of cytochrome in Gram-negative bacteria and in eucaryotes. In the present work, the strictly aerobic bacterium Bacillus subtilis was analyzed for subcellular localization and number of different cytochromes c. In vivo labeling with radioactive 5-aminolevulinic acid, a precursor to heme, showed that the proteins containing covalently bound heme are predominantly found in the membrane fraction. One major membrane-bound cytochrome c of about 15 kDa and with an alpha-band absorption peak in the reduced state at 550 nm was analyzed in more detail. Cytochrome c-550 has the properties of an integral membrane protein. The physiological function of this relatively high redox potential cytochrome is not known. Its structural gene, cccA, was cloned, sequenced, and overexpressed in B. subtilis. The gene maps adjacent to rpoD (sigA) at 223 degrees on the chromosome. The amino acid sequence of cytochrome c-550 as deduced from the DNA sequence consists of 120 residues and contains one heme c binding site (Cys-Ile-Ala-Cys-His) located approximately in the middle of the polypeptide. From the hydropathy distribution and from comparisons to soluble c-type cytochromes of known three-dimensional structure, cytochrome c-550 seemingly consists of two domains; an N-terminal membrane-anchor domain and a C-terminal heme domain. A model for the topography of the cytochrome in the cytoplasmic membrane is suggested in which the N-terminal part spans the membrane in the form of a single segment in an alpha-helical conformation and the C-terminal heme domain is exposed on the extracytoplasmic side of the membrane. Deletion of cccA from the chromosome revealed another membrane-bound cytochrome with absorption maximum at 550 nm in the reduced state. Analysis of cccA deletion mutants demonstrated that the cytochrome c-550 encoded by cccA is not essential for growth of B. subtilis on rich or minimal media.    The orientation of 96 genes on the Bacillus subtilis chromosome was deduced by the analysis of published data. Of these genes, 91 were found to be oriented so that their promoters were proximal to the chromosomal replication origin and their transcription termini to the replication terminus. Transcription of these genes would therefore be co-directional with replication. This chromosomal organization is consistent with the hypothesis advanced for Escherichia coli that bacteria avoid head-on collisions between RNA polymerase and DNA replication proteins by the appropriate orientation of their transcription units.    Catabolite repression of the Bacillus subtilis alpha-amylase gene (amyE) involves an operator sequence located just downstream of the promoter (amyR), overlapping the transcription start site. Oligonucleotide site-directed mutagenesis of this sequence identified bases required for catabolite repression. Two mutations increased both the 2-fold symmetry of the operator and the repression ratio. Although many mutations reduced the repression ratio 3- to 11-fold, some also caused a 2-fold or greater increase in amylase production. Others caused hyperproduction without affecting catabolite repression. Homologous sequences in other catabolite-repressed B. subtilis promoters suggest a common regulatory site may be involved in catabolite repression.    The Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage SPO1 encodes the DNA-binding protein TF1, a homolog of the ubiquitous type II DNA-binding proteins that are components of bacterial chromatin. The known three-dimensional structure of a related protein was used in devising a scheme of site-directed mutagenesis that led to the creation of a temperature-sensitive mutation in the TF1 gene. At the nonpermissive temperature, this mutation disrupted the temporal regulation of viral protein synthesis and processing, altered the kinetics of accumulation of at least one viral transcript, and prohibited the production of infective progeny phage. We suggest that TF1 function is required to shut off the expression of several early-middle and middle viral genes and that TF1 plays a role in phage head morphogenesis. Spontaneous second-site mutations of the temperature-sensitive mutant TF1 allele that suppressed its associated phenotypes were analyzed. These suppressor mutations conferred greater amino acid sequence homology with the type II DNA-binding protein from the thermophile Bacillus stearothermophilus.    sigma E is a sporulation-specific sigma factor of Bacillus subtilis that is synthesized from an inactive precursor protein (P31). The structural gene (sigE) for P31 was reengineered by oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis to encode sigma E directly. The sequence specifying the first amino acid of sigma E (GGC) was placed immediately downstream of the initiating codon (ATG) of P31. The resulting sigE allele (sigE delta 84) encodes a sigma E-like protein which differs from the &quot;processed product&quot; by a single Met residue at its amino terminus. B. subtilis strains which carried this allele were Spo- and contained no detectable sigma E. The sigE delta 84 allele generated a product in Escherichia coli which, by quantitative Western immunoblot analysis, was present at 10 to 20% of the level of product (P31) obtained from a wild-type allele. A sigma E-like product was also not detected in two B. subtilis strains with missense mutations in the sequence encoding the processed region of P31. These results suggest that sigma E is a highly labile protein that is stabilized during its synthesis by an element of the precursor sequence. A mutant allele (sigE delta 48) which made an active sigma E-like protein in B. subtilis was isolated. This gene specified a product in which five amino acids, not derived from the P31 processed region, were joined to P31 at a position eight amino acids upstream of the processing site.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    Transcription of the Bacillus subtilis gnt operon results in a polycistronic mRNA that encodes from the 5&apos; end the Gnt repressor, gluconate kinase and permease. The RNA is drastically induced through inactivation of the Gnt repressor by gluconate. The results of deletion analysis of the gnt promoter region upstream of the repressor gene indicated that no other promoter except the gnt promoter was present for expression of the gluconate kinase gene. In contrast to the synthesis of gluconate kinase and permease, which was markedly induced by gluconate, the results of a radioimmunoassay for the Gnt repressor indicated that synthesis of the Gnt repressor from the induced mRNA was posttranscriptionally repressed.    The expression of the Bacillus subtilis sacPA operon is induced by sucrose. A DNA fragment containing the upstream region of this operon was cloned. This fragment contains a promoter from which the operon is expressed. This upstream region also contains a palindromic DNA sequence very similar to the transcriptional terminator which regulates the induction of the B. subtilis sacB gene. Of 37 nucleotides in a region partially overlapping the sacP palindromic sequence, 34 were identical to the corresponding region of the sacB gene. A similar motif is also present in the bgl operon of Escherichia coli. The sacT locus controlling sacPA expression had been identified by a single constitutive mutation sacT30 which mapped close to the sacPA operon. DNA fragments containing the sacT+ and sacT30 alleles were cloned and sequenced. The sacT gene product is very similar to the B. subtilis sacY and to the E. coli bglG gene products. The constitutive sacT30 mutation was identified. It corresponds to a Asp-96-to-Tyr missense mutation located in a highly conserved region in SacT and SacY. These results strongly suggest that sacT is a specific regulatory gene of the sacPA operon.    The lacR gene encodes the repressor of the lactose operon of S. aureus. The nucleotide sequence of this gene and the promoter-operator region of the operon are reported. The lacR gene encodes a protein with a molecular weight of 28,534. This protein was found to share sequence homology with the DeoR protein, the repressor of the E. coli deoxyribonucleotide operon. Directly and invertedly repeated sequences were found associated with the promoter for the structural genes of the operon. These sequences were examined by site-directed mutagenesis and found to be important in repressor binding and in the binding of a catabolite repressor. Evidence is presented in support of a model for catabolite repression of the operon which involves a negative-acting transcriptional regulator which binds to the promoter region of the operon and prevents transcription.    We review and discuss the biological and DNA-binding properties of the bacteriophage SPO1 transcription factor 1 (TF1), a DNA-binding protein belonging to the ubiquitous prokaryotic family of Type II DNA-binding proteins. We review recent information on the effects of certain mutations in TF1 on DNA-binding and on its ability to sharply bend DNA. We also compare the DNA-binding properties of the three best-studied type II DNA-binding proteins, Escherichia coli HU, E. coli integration host factor, and TF1, and discuss them in the context of the structure and properties of chromatin in prokaryotes.    A DNA fragment containing the flaD locus of Bacillus subtilis, which had been cloned into plasmid pAC3, was subcloned into an M13 phage and sequenced. The sequence contained five open reading frames (ORFs), of which ORF2 was the flaD gene. Unexpectedly, the sequence of the flaD locus was identical to that of sin [sporulation inhibition gene; Gaur, N. K., Dubnau, E. &amp; Smith, I. (1986). Journal of Bacteriology 168, 860-869]. A B. licheniformis homologue (flaL) of the B. subtilis flaD locus was cloned into pUC19 and identified by colony hybridization. The B. licheniformis DNA was subcloned and sequenced. Two ORFs (ORF1, or L-ORF1; and ORF2, or flaL) were detected, encoding 58 and 111 amino acid residues, respectively. These are almost identical in length to ORF1 (D-ORF1; 57 amino acids) and flaD (111 amino acids) on the fragment of B. subtilis DNA. The overall interspecies differences between the nucleotide sequences of D-ORF1 and L-ORF1, and those of flaD and flaL, were 42% and 11%, respectively, and the differences in the predicted amino acid sequences were 50% and 7%, respectively. The regions 3&apos; of the ORFs (flaL and flaD) in both species resemble rho-independent terminators of transcription. The characteristics of the amino acid sequences are also discussed.    comC specifies a protein product that is required for genetic competence in Bacillus subtilis. The probable transcriptional start site of comC has been localized by high-resolution primer extension analysis and shown to be preceded by an appropriately positioned sequence that resembles the consensus promoter for the sigma A form of RNA polymerase. Low-resolution S1 nuclease transcription mapping was used to identify the comC terminator, which is located near a palindromic element recognizable in the DNA sequence. Deletion analysis of the sequence upstream from the likely promoter identified a region required in cis for the expression of comC. An overlapping, and possibly identical, sequence was shown to inhibit the expression of competence and of several late competence genes, when present in multiple copies. This was interpreted as due to the titration of a positively acting competence transcription factor (CTF) by multiple copies of the promoter-bearing fragment. In crude lysates of B. subtilis grown to competence, a DNA-binding activity that appeared to be specific for the comC promoter fragment was detected by gel retardation assays. This activity, postulated to be due to CTF, was detected only following growth in competence medium, only in the stationary phase of growth, and was dependent on the expression of ComA, a known competence-regulatory factor. In the presence of the mecA42 mutation, the ComA requirement for CTF activity was bypassed, and CTF activity could be detected in lysates prepared from a strain grown in complex medium. This behavior suggested that either the expression or the activation of CTF was regulated in a competence-specific manner.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    ermC 23S rRNA methyltransferase dimethylates adenine 2085 in Bacillus subtilis 23S rRNA and also regulates its own synthesis by autogenous translational repression. We have characterized the binding of ermC&apos; methyltransferase to 23S rRNA. This protein differs in only five amino acid residues from the ermC product and was chosen for study because of its greater stability and ease of isolation. A filter binding assay was used to study the physical aspects of binding in the absence of methylation. The dissociation equilibrium constant of the binding was found to be 4 x 10(-9) M at 37 degrees C. Kinetic studies of complex formation and dissociation revealed that the kon and koff were 4 x 10(6) M-1 s-1 and 6.8 x 10(-2) s-1 respectively at 16 degrees C. Equilibrium competition experiments showed that the enzyme has varying affinities for a variety of nucleic acids in the order 23S rRNA greater than 16S rRNA greater than M13 DNA, f2 RNA greater than tRNA. One of the end products of methylation, methylated 23S rRNA, had an affinity for the ermC&apos; methyltransferase similar to that of unmethylated 23S rRNA. The binding affinity to 23S rRNA and the kinetics of the interaction were not detectably affected by the presence of AdoMet. The binding of ermC&apos; methyltransferase to 23S rRNA had an unfavorable van&apos;t Hoff enthalpy (delta H = +6.2 kcal mol-1) and was driven by entropy (delta S = +56.2 cal mol-1 deg-1). The interaction between the two ligands involved at most two to three ionic pairings, and nonelectrostatic interactions contributed approximately 85% of the binding energy. The structural aspect of the interaction was investigated by probing with dimethyl sulfate, for ermC&apos; methyltransferase dependent protection of 23S rRNA. A region of protection was detected, in the vicinity of the central loop of rRNA domain V and surrounding the site of methylation.    Gene expression in Bacillus subtilis can be controlled by alternative forms of RNA polymerase programmed by distinct sigma factors. One such factor, sigma D (sigma 28), is expressed during vegetative growth and has been implicated in the transcription of a regulon of genes expressed during exponential growth and the early stationary phase. We have studied several functions related to flagellar synthesis and chemotaxis in B. subtilis strains in which sigma D is missing or is present at reduced levels. Previous studies showed that a null mutant, which contains a disrupted copy of the sigma D structural gene (sigD), fails to synthesize flagellin and grows as long filaments. We now show that these defects are accompanied by the lack of synthesis of the methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins and a substantial decrease in two autolysin activities implicated in cell separation. A strain containing an insertion upstream of the sigD gene that reduces the level of sigma D protein grew as short chains and was flagellated but was impaired in chemotaxis and/or motility. This reduced level of sigma D expression suggests that the sigD gene may be part of an operon. A strain containing an insertion downstream of the sigD gene expressed nearly wild-type levels of sigma D protein but was also impaired in chemotaxis and/or motility, suggesting that genes downstream of sigD may also be involved in these functions. Genetic experiments demonstrate that sigD is allelic to the flaB locus, which was initially isolated as a locus affecting flagellin expression (G. F. Grant and M. I. Simon, J. Bacteriol. 99:116-124, 1969).    By use of a T7 expression system, large amounts of active Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase sigma A factor were produced in Escherichia coli cells. This overproduced protein was found in the form of inclusion bodies and constituted 40% of the total cellular protein. Because of the ease of isolation of the inclusion bodies and the acidic properties of sigma A, the protein was purified to more than 99% purity and the yield was about 90 mg/liter of culture. Gel mobility, antigenicity, specificity of promoter recognition, and N-terminal amino acid sequence of the overproduced sigma were found to be the same as those of native sigma A. Partial proteolysis analysis of sigma A protein suggested the presence of a protease-sensitive surface region in the C-terminal part of the sigma A protein. The promoter -10 binding region of sigma A was less sensitive to proteases and was probably involved in a hydrophobic, tightly folded domain of sigma A protein.    The arginine-dependent repressor/activator AhrC from Bacillus subtilis has been crystallized in space group C222(1), with unit cell dimensions a = 229.8 A, b = 72.8 A, c = 137.7 A and one aporepressor hexamer per asymmetric unit. Preliminary X-ray photographs show measurable intensities beyond 3.0 A.    Two Bacillus subtilis tRNA(His) precursors (Green, C. J., and Vold, B. S. (1988) J. Biol. Chem. 263, 652-657) were processed by Escherichia coli RNase P in the presence of varying [Mg2+]. The wild type precursor was processed under all conditions to afford a single tRNA product containing 8 base pairs in the acceptor stem. In contrast, the position of processing of a mutant tRNA(His) precursor (containing a G27----A27 alteration) was shown to be condition-dependent. Processing occurred at A27 under conditions consistent with formation of an A27-C100 base pair in the acceptor stem but at G28 under conditions that disfavored base pair formation. The ability to control the site of RNase P-mediated tRNA precursor processing is unprecedented and permits analysis of the chemical factors that promote processing.    The fumarate reductase operon of Wolinella succinogenes is made up of three structural genes (frd-CAB). The frdC gene was located next to the promoter region and identified as the cytochrome b structural gene encoding 256 amino acid residues. The N-terminal amino acid sequences of seven fragments derived from the cytochrome b moiety of the enzyme all mapped within the frdC gene. This suggested that the enzyme contained only one species of cytochrome b. Re-evaluation of earlier measurements of subunit composition, haem B content and molecular weight led to the conclusion that the enzyme contained one molecule of cytochrome b with two haem B groups. The hydropathy plot of the amino acid sequence predicted five membrane-spanning hydrophobic segments, the first four of which contained a single histidine residue each. These residues could form the axial ligands to the two haem B groups. FrdC was found to be homologous with the cytochrome b (SdhC) of the Bacillus subtilis succinate dehydrogenase, but not with the hydrophobic subunits of the fumarate reductase or succinate dehydrogenase of Escherichia coli.    A functional analysis of the Arthrobacter oxidans 6-hydroxy-D-nicotine oxidase (6-HDNO) gene promoter (-35 region TTGACA and -10 region TATCAAT) and the UUG translation start codon was performed using site-directed mutagenesis. Deletion of the C residue from the -10 promoter region or mutations introduced upstream of the -10 region resulted in an increased 6-HDNO expression in Escherichia coli cells in vivo and in both E. coli and A. oxidans coupled transcription-translation systems in vitro. From the identical behaviour of 6-HDNO promoter mutants in the heterologous and homologous systems, it is concluded that A. oxidans harbours an RNA polymerase functionally homologous to the E. coli sigma 70 and Bacillus subtilis sigma 43 polymerases. Replacement of the TTG codon (UUG translation initiation codon) with ATG led to a 3.7-fold increase in 6-HDNO expression in E. coli. This effect was less pronounced at higher promoter strengths, from 3.7 in the case of the 6-HDNO wild-type promoter, to 2.5 in the case of the consensus -10 region and to 1.7 in the case of the tac promoter. A double point mutation introduced close to the ribosome binding site resulted in almost the same increase in 6-HDNO expression (3.1-fold) as the TTG-to-ATG exchange. The failure of cAMP to stimulate 6-HDNO expression in the A. oxidans system indicated that expression of this gene in stationary phase cells is not regulated by cAMP-catabolite repressore protein-mediated mechanism of catabolite repression.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    In order to facilitate studies on the maintenance of cryptic plasmids from Gram-positive bacteria we have constructed a novel cassette cAPG1000 (5.0 kb) which carries both a selectable marker (chloramphenicol resistance from Staphylococcus aureus plasmid pC194) and a screenable marker (the xylE gene from the TOL plasmid of Pseudomonas putida expressed from a cloned promoter of Bacillus phage SPO2) and which is flanked by terminators to prevent transcription from the cassette activating or inhibiting loci adjacent to the site of insertion. To demonstrate the usefulness of this cassette we have mapped loci required for stable maintenance of an 8.6 kb cryptic plasmid endogenous to Bacillus subtilis (pPOD2000) from the properties of cAPG1000 insertion and insertion/deletion derivatives. We have identified the replication region as well as separate regions required for segregational and structural stability. The segregational mechanism is very efficient since it allows no detectable loss despite the fact that bacteria carrying the plasmid have a greatly increased mean generation time.    A Bacillus subtilis gene, required for genetic competence, was identified immediately upstream from the previously characterized gene comA. The comA gene product has been found to exhibit amino acid sequence similarity to the so-called effector class of signal-transduction proteins. DNA sequencing of the new determinant, named comP, revealed that the carboxy-terminal domain of the predicted ComP protein is similar in amino acid sequence to that of several sensor members of the bacterial two-component signal-transduction systems. The predicted amino-terminal domain contains several hydrophobic segments, postulated to be membrane-spanning. In vitro-derived comP disruptions are epistatic on the expression of all late competence genes tested, including comG, comC, comD, and comE, but not on expression of the early gene comB. Although comA has its own promoter, some transcription of comA, especially later in growth, occurs via readthrough from comP sequences. A roughly twofold epistatic effect of a comP disruption was noted on the downstream comA determinant, possibly due to interruption of readthrough transcription from comP to comA. Overexpression of comA fully restored competence to a comP mutant, providing evidence that ComA acts after ComP, and consistent with a role for the latter protein in activation of the former, possibly by phosphorylation. ComP probably is involved in transmitting information concerning the nutritional status of the medium, particularly the presence of nitrogen- and carbon-containing nutrients. ComP was also shown to play a role in sporulation, at least partly interchangeable with that of SpoIIJ, another putative sensor protein.    PBSX, a defective Bacillus subtilis prophage, maps to the metA-metC region of the chromosome. DNA (33 kilobases) from this region of the chromosome was cloned and analyzed by insertional mutagenesis with the integrating plasmid pWD3. This plasmid had a promoterless alpha-amylase gene (amyL) that provided information on the direction and level of transcription at the site of integration. Transcription under the control of the PBSX repressor proceeded in the direction metA to metC over a distance of at least 18 kilobases. Electrophoretic analysis of proteins produced by different integrant strains upon PBSX induction and by fragments subcloned in Escherichia coli allowed the identification of early and late regions of the prophage. A set of contiguous fragments directing mutagenic integration suggested that the minimum size of an operon that encodes phage structural proteins is 19 kilobases. The adaptation of PBSX transcriptional and replicational functions to a chromosomally based, thermoinducible expression system is discussed.    Taking advantage of the known sequence conservation of portions of bacterial sigma factor proteins, we have designed degenerate oligonucleotides corresponding to these domains and used these synthetic DNA sequences as primers in a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify DNA sequences from the chlamydial genome. The PCR products were used as a probe to recover the genomic fragments from a library of cloned murine Chlamydia trachomatis DNA. Sequence analysis of one of these clones revealed striking homology to the sigma-70 protein of Escherichia coli and the sigma-43 protein of Bacillus subtilis, strongly implying that this locus (sigA) encodes the major vegetative sigma factor of murine C. trachomatis. This PCR-based approach will be broadly applicable to the cloning of major sigma factors from other eubacteria.    The expression of the chloramphenicol-inducible chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene (cat) of the staphylococcal plasmid pUB112 is regulated at the post-transcriptional level. Previous in vivo analyses suggested that the antibiotic stalls ribosomes that are translating a regulatory leader peptide, and that a stalled ribosome activates the ribosome binding site of the acetyltransferase encoding sequence by opening an attenuating leader mRNA hairpin structure. To test this model, we used a Bacillus subtilis S-30 extract for an in vitro translation system and in vitro synthesized cat in RNAs. We showed that the leader portion of the cat transcript acts as a translational attenuator of cat gene expression in absence of chloramphenicol. The drug stimulates acetyltransferase synthesis by a leader mRNA-dependent activation of translation of the cat message. By using 5&apos; end-labeled transcripts and employing the endogenous RNase activity of the S-30 extract we demonstrated that this activation is due to an antibiotic-induced stalling of a ribosome on cat leader mRNA.    Endospores of the Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis are encased in a tough protein shell known as the coat. The coat is composed of a dozen or more different structural proteins. We report the identification of and studies on the regulation of promoters governing the expression of coat protein (cot) genes designated B to E encoding polypeptides of 59, 12, 11 and 24 kDa, respectively. We show that transcription of genes B, C and D is governed by single promoters and that transcription of gene E is governed by tandem promoters designated P1 and P2. In extension of recent work on the transcription of cot gene A and the mother-cell regulatory genes gerE, sigK and spoIIID, we show that genes involved in coat formation are turned on in a regulatory cascade of at least four co-ordinately controlled gene sets. The cascade consists of: cotE as transcribed from its P1 promoter and spoIIID, which are turned on during hours three to four of sporulation; cotE as transcribed from its P2 promoter and sigK, which are turned on during hour five by the appearance of the product (a small DNA-binding protein) of spoIIID; cotA, cotD and gerE, which are turned on during hours five to six by the appearance of the product (sigma factor sigma K) of sigK; and cotB and cotC, which are turned on during hour seven by the appearance of the product (an inferred DNA-binding protein) of gerE. The cascade is hierarchical in that the first three gene sets each contain the regulatory gene that turns on the expression of the next gene set in the pathway. We also show that the level of expression of a member (cotC) of the terminal class of gene expression is strongly influenced by medium and that this effect directly or indirectly depends on the product of sporulation gene spoIV A.    Through genetic studies, the fliA gene product has been shown to regulate positively gene expression in late operons of the flagellar regulon in Salmonella typhimurium. In the present study, the fliA gene was cloned and sequenced. The fliA coding region consisted of 717 nucleotides beginning with the GTG initiation codon and the conserved sequence specific to promoters for flagellar operons was found to exist upstream of the coding region. The fliA gene product deduced from the nucleotide sequence was a protein with 239 amino acid residues and the calculated molecular mass was 27,470 dalton. The deduced amino acid sequence was homologous with that of sigma 28, a flagellar specific sigma factor of Bacillus subtilis. The fliA gene product was identified as a protein of molecular mass 29 kDa in the in vitro transcription-translation system, while three proteins of 29 kDa, 31 kDa and 32 kDa were found in the products programmed by the fliA gene in minicells and in maxicells. The 29 kDa FliA protein was purified from the FliA overproducing strain which carried the ptac-fliA fusion. This protein activated the in vitro synthesis of flagellin, the fliC gene product. RNA polymerase containing the purified FliA protein was shown to transcribe the fliC gene. These results indicate that FliA protein functions as an alternative sigma factor specific for S. typhimurium flagellar operons.    The structural gene (sigK) for the mother-cell RNA polymerase sigma-factor sigma K in Bacillus subtilis is a composite of two truncated genes, named spoIVCB and spoIIIC, which are brought together by site-specific recombination during sporulation. We now show that the recombination event is compartmentalized in that the mother cell, but not the forespore chromosome, undergoes rearrangement. We also show that spoIIIC (encoding the carboxy-terminal portion of sigma K) lies approximately 42 kb downstream of spoIVCB (encoding the amino-terminal portion) and that the joining of the truncated coding sequences is a reciprocal recombination event in which intervening DNA is deleted from the chromosome as a circle. The rearrangement is governed by the product of a gene named spoIVCA located in the excised DNA, as demonstrated by the observations (1) that the product of spoIVCA, but not the product of any other stage-IV sporulation gene tested, is required for the rearrangement, and (2) that the presence of a cloned copy of the rearranged sigK gene in the chromosome bypasses the requirement for the spoIVCA gene product in sporulation. Because cells engineered to contain an intact copy of sigK sporulate normally, we conclude that the sigK rearrangement is not essential for the control of gene expression during sporulation, and we infer the existence of an additional mechanism for restricting sigma K-directed transcription to the mother-cell chamber of the sporangium. Finally, the construction of a strain deleted for the entire sigK intervening sequence shows that the 42-kb element contains no genes essential for viability.    Bacillus thuringiensis delta-endotoxin (crystal protein) genes are normally expressed only during sporulation. It is possible to produce crystal protein during vegetative growth by placing B. thuringiensis crystal protein genes downstream of a strong vegetative promoter. By removing a possible transcriptional terminator of the tetracycline resistance gene of pBC16 and inserting a multiple cloning site, delta-endotoxin genes can be cloned downstream from the tetracycline resistance gene promoter. This construct allows for readthrough transcription from the strong vegetative promoter. Crystal protein is then produced during vegetative growth as well as during sporulation in both B. thuringiensis and Bacillus megaterium. This construct also allows for production of delta-endotoxin in B. thuringiensis strains that do not normally produce delta-endotoxin because of a defect in sporulation.    The gene spoIIID, which is essential for spore formation in Bacillus subtilis, was cloned and sequenced. It consists of one open reading frame which would encode a 93-amino-acid protein with a classic helix-turn-helix motif, characteristic of sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins. SpoIIID protein is a previously identified transcription factor, capable of altering the specificity of RNA polymerase containing sigma K in vitro (Kroos et al., 1989). The spoIIID83 mutation (by which the locus was originally identified), was sequenced and found to be a single base substitution in the ribosome binding site upstream of the spoIIID open reading frame. A transcriptional fusion to lacZ was constructed and used to examine the regulation of spoIIID. Expression of spoIIID occurred only during sporulation, beginning 1.5 to 2 hours after the initiation of sporulation. The dependence of spoIIID expression on other spo loci suggests that it is mother-cell-specific, and that it is transcribed by sigma E-containing RNA polymerase.    Mutations within P23, the first gene of the Bacillus subtilis sigma A operon, were not detrimental to vegetative growth or sporulation. One deletion of P23 resulted in a strain that sporulated earlier than the wild type. This aberrant phenotype may be due to the simultaneous deletion of a sigma H promoter from the sigma A operon.    The senS gene of Bacillus subtilis, which in high copy number stimulates the expression of several extracellular-protein genes, has been cloned, genetically mapped, and sequenced. The gene codes for a highly charged basic protein containing 65 amino acid residues. The gene is characterized by the presence of a transcription terminator (attenuator) located between the promoter and open reading frame, a strong ribosome-binding site, and a strong transcription terminator at the 3&apos; end of this monocistronic gene. The amino acid sequence of SenS showed partial homology with the N-terminal core binding domain region of bacterial RNA polymerase sigma factors and a helix-turn-helix motif found in DNA-binding proteins. The gene can be deleted without any effect on growth or sporulation.    A cloned chemotaxis operon has been characterized. Thirteen representative che mutations from different complementation groups were localized on the physical map by recombination experiments. The use of integration plasmids established that at least 10 of these complementation groups within this locus are cotranscribed. An additional three complementation groups may form part of the same transcript. The direction of transcription and the time of expression were determined from chromosomal che-lacZ gene fusions. The promoter was cloned and localized to a 3-kilobase fragment. Expression of beta-galactosidase from this promoter was observed primarily during the logarithmic phase of growth. Three-factor PBS1 cotransduction experiments were performed to order the che locus with respect to adjacent markers. The cheF141 mutation is 70 to 80% linked to pyrD1. This linkage is different from that reported previously (G. W. Ordal, D. O. Nettleton, and J. A. Hoch, J. Bacteriol. 154:1088-1097, 1983). The cheM127 mutation is 57% linked by transformation to spcB3. The gene order determined from all crosses is pyrD-cheF-cheM-spcB.    We describe the use of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique to alter transcriptional and translational signals surrounding a gene so as to achieve overexpression in Escherichia coli. By changing the ribosome-binding site sequence preceding the hinfIR gene to match the consensus E. coli signal and by adding a transcription terminator sequence immediately following the gene, the yield of HinfI was increased about tenfold over that obtained from the natural Haemophilus influenzae signals. The addition of the positive retroregulator stem-loop sequence derived from the crystal protein-encoding gene of Bacillus thuringiensis downstream from the hinfIR gene further increased yields by twofold to a level of 13% of the total cellular protein.    Endo-beta-1,4-glucanase genes from Bacillus circulans and from B. polymyxa were cloned by direct expression by using bacteriophage M13mp9 as the vector. The enzymatic activity of the gene products was detected by using either the Congo red assay or hydroxyethyl cellulose dyed with Ostazin Brilliant Red H-3B. The B. circulans and B. subtilis PAP115 endo-beta-1,4-glucanase genes were shown to be homologous by the use of restriction endonuclease site mapping, DNA-DNA hybridization, S1 nuclease digestion after heteroduplex formation, and sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of the protein products. Analysis of the nucleotide sequence of 3.1 kilobase pairs of cloned B. polymyxa DNA revealed two convergently transcribed open reading frames (ORFs) consisting of 398 codons (endoglucanase) and 187 codons (ORF2) and separated by 374 nucleotides. The coding region of the B. polymyxa endoglucanase gene would theoretically produce a 44-kilodalton preprotein. Expression of the B. polymyxa endoglucanase in Escherichia coli was due to a fusion of the endoglucanase gene at codon 30 with codon 9 of the lacZ alpha-peptide gene. The B. polymyxa endoglucanase has 34% amino acid similarity to the Clostridium thermocellum celB endoglucanase sequence but very little similarity to endoglucanases from other Bacillus species. ORF2 has 28% amino acid similarity to the NH2-terminal half of the E. coli lac repressor protein, which is responsible for DNA binding.    The complete nucleotide (nt) sequence of a 5.1-kb EcoRI DNA restriction fragment carrying the replication region of the Streptococcus faecalis plasmid pAM beta 1 has been determined. Of the seven major open reading frames (ORF A-G) identified within this fragment, two (C and E) were shown to be encoding by in vitro transcription/translation assays. Evidence was obtained that synthesis of the polypeptide (Mr 57,380) encoded by the largest ORF (E) was essential for replication. Deletion analysis indicated that the minimum unit of DNA required for replication resided on a 2.59-kb AccI-HpaI subfragment. ORF C resided outside of this fragment and encompassed an extensive region of directly repeated nt sequence. The encoded polypeptide (Mr 30,471) was therefore composed of large tracts of reiterated amino acid sequence (11 x VDP and 35 x TEP tripeptides) which probably caused the observed anomalous electrophoretic mobility of the synthesised protein (equivalent to 61 kDa). Deletion of a 416-bp segment of DNA between unique KpnI and StyI sites caused an increase in copy number, which correlated with the in vitro production of higher levels of ORF E polypeptide. Although homology was detected between the sequenced DNA, and the replicon of a closely related streptococcal plasmid (pSM19035), none was evident to any other characterised Gram+ plasmid.    The nucleotide (nt) sequences of the Bacillus pumilus trpE, trpD and 5&apos; portions of trpC genes have been determined. Genetic analysis suggested the presence of an internal promoter upstream from the trpC gene, yet no typical consensus sequences were found. The nt and amino acid sequence homologies between the B. pumilus, Bacillus subtilis and Escherichia coli trp genes are presented.    Using 8.8 kb of genetic information from Bacillus sphaericus, it was possible to confer to Escherichia coli bio- strains, including delta bioA-D, bioC-, bioH-, the ability to convert exogenous pimelate into biotin. The bio genes were borne on two recombinant plasmids with inserts of 4.3 kb and 4.5 kb, which had been isolated from a genomic bank of HindIII-digested B. sphaericus DNA, by phenotypic complementation of various E. coli bio mutants. The B. sphaericus bioD and bioA genes were unambiguously identified within the 4.3-kb insert and shown to be closely linked to bioY (coding for a protein with a presently unknown function) and to bioB [Ohsawa et al., Gene 80 (1989) 39-48]. These genes are clustered in the order bioDAYB. The 4.5-kb fragment contains genetic information for three different proteins, the products of bioX, bioW and bioF. Complementation studies using an E. coli bioF mutant and a B. subtilis bio112TG3 strain, revealed that the third ORF of this cluster encodes 7-keto-8-aminopelargonic acid synthetase. A combination of bioW and bioF allows an efficient complementation of E. coli bioC and bioH mutants, provided that pimelate is added to the biotin-depleted growth medium. No function could be identified for the product of bioX. The gene order of this cluster is bioXWF. By sequence analysis, the two cloned DNA fragments were shown to bear overlapping open reading frames and secondary structures at their 3&apos; ends, typical of transcription terminators.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    The spoOA gene of Bacillus subtilis is critical for the initial stages in the developmental cycle leading to the formation of an endospore. We show that one function of the SpoOA protein is to negatively regulate another regulatory locus, abrB, which controls the expression of many genes associated with the onset of sporulation. Purified SpoOA protein binds to a specific region of the abrB promoter and functions as a repressor of transcription in an in vitro assay. The binding of the SpoOA protein is independent of the binding of the AbrB protein, which is known to autoregulate its expression. This independence mirrors the temporal sequence of events in abrB control.    Two independent genes, recN and spoIVB, along with their respective promoter and termination regions, were discovered and sequenced in the 3.4-kilobase region between the ahrC and spoOA genes at map position 216 in the Bacillus subtilis chromosome map. The gene encoding a 576-amino-acid protein, which maintains a high homology with the Escherichia coli recN gene product, was adjacent to ahrC. The sequence revealed a 64,472-dalton polypeptide which contained a conserved ATP-binding site and possible lexA-type regulatory binding sequences in its promoter region. A second open reading frame identified as the spoIVB gene was directly downstream of recN. It consisted of 1,275 nucleotides which coded for a 425-amino-acid polypeptide with a molecular weight of 45,976. Phenotypic, genetic, and transcriptional analyses confirmed that this gene was spoIVB. Although no chloroform-resistant spores were produced by spoIVB-inactivated strains, under microscopic examination, phase-gray forespores were visible. The spoIVB165 mutation was localized to a 200-base-pair region in the amino-terminal portion of the polypeptide, spoIVB was not transcribed until hour 2 of sporulation in wild-type B. subtilis cells, as determined by beta-galactosidase activity assays from lacZ transcriptional fusion constructions. We found no amino acid sequence homology between the spoIVB gene product and other known bacterial proteins.    The essential 4.5S RNA gene of Escherichia coli can be complemented by 4.5S RNA-like genes from three other eubacteria, including both gram-positive and gram-negative organisms. Two of the genes encode RNAs similar in size to the E. coli species; the third, from Bacillus subtilis, specifies an RNA more than twice as large. The heterologous genes are expressed efficiently in E. coli, and the product RNAs resemble those produced by cognate cells. We conclude that the heterologous RNAs can replace E. coli 4.5S RNA and that the essential function of 4.5S RNA is evolutionarily conserved. A consensus structure is presented for the functionally related 4.5S RNA homologs.    Transcription initiation from the Bacillus subtilis phage phi 29 late A3 promoter requires the viral protein p4, a transcriptional activator. Protein p4 binds to a region of the A3 promoter, located between nucleotides -50 and -100 relative to the transcription start site, that presents a sequence-directed curvature. This curvature is enhanced when protein p4 binds to the promoter. A number of deletion mutants at the carboxyl end of protein p4 have been constructed and their behavior as transcriptional activators of the late A3 promoter has been investigated. The binding of these deletion mutants to the late A3 promoter has been analyzed by gel retardation, DNase I footprinting, methylation interference and circular permutation assays. The results suggest that the last 12 amino acid residues of protein p4, six of which are positively charged, although not involved in the specific recognition of the promoter are responsible for part of the bend induced by protein p4 in its binding site. Evidence is presented which suggests that full induction of this curvature is needed for the transcription activation process. A model is proposed for protein p4 interaction with the A3 promoter, in which the bend is induced in two steps: first, two monomers of protein p4 bind to the inverted recognition sequences, subsequent interaction between them generating a bend between these sequences; second, the highly basic carboxyl terminus of protein p4 establishes non-specific electrostatic interactions with the DNA backbone inducing a bend at both ends of the protein p4 binding region.    The gerA operon of Bacillus subtilis 168 comprises three genes concerned with the triggering of spore germination by L-alanine and its analogues. The expression of this operon has been characterized using chromosomal lacZ fusions to the gerA promoter. The gerA promoter is switched on 2.5-3 hours after the initiation of sporulation, in parallel with glucose dehydrogenase. A high proportion of the gerA-driven beta-galactosidase detected in sporulating cells is found in the mature spore; the gerA promoter is therefore active in the forespore compartment of the sporulating cell. The gerA promoter is not expressed in spoO, spoII or spoIIIA, B, E and G mutant backgrounds, but is expressed in spoIIIC and D and in spoIV and V mutants. The in vivo transcriptional startpoint of the operon has been mapped by primer extension experiments; sequences upstream from this startpoint show significant homology with recognition sequences for RNA polymerase containing sigma G (E sigma G). The gerA operon was transcribed in vitro by E sigma G with a startpoint identical to that used in vivo, and expression of the gerA operon was rapidly induced in vegetative cells by induction of sigma G synthesis. These data indicate that the gerA operon is an additional member of the sigma G regulon, which includes a number of genes expressed in parallel only in the forespore compartment of sporulating B. subtilis cells.    Expression of the aconitase (citB) gene of Bacillus subtilis is subject to catabolite repression in cells grown in minimal media. In nutrient broth medium, citB expression is low in growing cells but is induced when cells enter sporulation. A 600-base-pair DNA fragment that extends from positions -400 through +200, relative to the transcription start site, was shown to include all of the cis-acting sequences necessary for catabolite repression and sporulation-associated regulation. This was demonstrated by fusing this DNA fragment to the Escherichia coli lacZ gene, integrating the fusion in the amyE locus of the B. subtilis chromosome, and measuring the regulation of expression of beta-galactosidase. By creating a series of deletions from either end of the 600-base-pair fragment, it was possible to define a target for catabolite repression; at least part of this target lies within the sequence between positions -84 and -68. DNA fragments that included positions -84 through +36, when carried on high-copy plasmids, caused derepression of aconitase synthesis, as if a negative regulator were being titrated. The same plasmids caused derepression of citrate synthase activity as well. Deletion of the sequence between positions -84 and -67 abolished this titration effect for both enzymes. Mutations that altered the target for catabolite repression also affected the inducibility of citB at the onset of sporulation, at least when sporulation was induced by the addition of decoyinine, an inhibitor of guanine nucleotide synthesis. When sporulation was induced by exhaustion of nutrient broth, there was no detectable difference in expression of citB-lacZ fusions whether or not they had the citB sequence from positions -84 to -67, suggesting that the mechanisms of regulation of citB in minimal medium and nutrient broth are different.    In some media, Bacillus subtilis can maintain a prolonged stationary growth phase; however, in other media, nutrient depletion triggers a complex differentiation that culminates in production of a dormant endospore. This differentiation requires the expression of many genes. We found that during the stationary phase in media in which the cells do not form endospores and do not normally express these sporulation-essential genes, a recessive mutation in spoIIAB caused increased transcription of a set of genes essential for sporulation. Evidently, the wild-type product of spoIIAB acts during the stationary phase to prevent expression of additional sporulation-specific genes.    The target of the induction by sucrose of the levansucrase gene is a transcription terminator (sacRt) located upstream from the coding sequence, sacB. The two-gene locus sacX-sacY (formerly sacS) and the ptsI gene were previously shown to be involved in this induction. ptsI encodes enzyme I of the phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent phosphotransferase system. SacX is strongly homologous to sucrose-specific phosphotransferase system-dependent permeases. SacY is a positive regulator of sacB. Here we show that SacY is probably an antiterminator interacting directly with sacRt, since in Escherichia coli the presence of the sacY gene stimulates the expression of a reporter gene fused downstream from sacRt. Missense mutations affecting sacY were sequenced, and the sacB regulation was studied in isogenic strains carrying these mutations or in vitro-generated mutations affecting sacX, sacY, or ptsI. The phenotype of double mutants suggests a model in which SacX might be a sucrose sensor that would be phosphorylated by the phosphotransferase system and, in this state, could inhibit the SacY antiterminator. Exogenous sucrose, or a mutation inactivating the phosphotransferase system, would dephosphorylate SacX and allow antitermination at sacRt.    The expression of the cat gene of the staphylococcal plasmid pC194 present in the pLS1-pC194 composite plasmid pJS37 was lower in Streptococcus pneumoniae and Escherichia coli than in Bacillus subtilis. Different transcription start points (and, by inference, different promoter utilization) of the cat mRNA synthesized in S. pneumoniae or B. subtilis were detected. Plasmid pJS37 is prone to deletion formation when host cells are grown in the presence of chloramphenicol (Cm). The analysis of the expression of the cat gene carried by the deleted derivatives of pJS37 has shown that a new promoter for the synthesis of cat mRNA is involved in the selective advantage conferred to the host by those deleted plasmids. Characterization of either in vivo or in vitro deleted plasmids has shown that the nucleotide sequence that could encode for a putative leader peptide is required for the Cm-induced pC194 cat gene expression.    We studied internal molecular motions in Bacillus subtilis phage SPO1 DNA using the time-resolved fluorescence polarization anisotropy (FPA) of intercalated ethidium. The torsional flexibility of this (hydroxymethyl)uracil-containing DNA is very similar to that of naturally occurring thymine-containing DNAs, as judged from fits of the time-resolved FPA decay to an elastic DNA model. Binding of transcription factor 1 (TF1), a type II procaryotic DNA binding protein encoded by the phage SPO1, enhances the FPA, indicating a substantial decrease in the average DNA torsional flexibility in the DNA-TF1 complex. The FPA increase is correlated with a reduced ethidium binding affinity. The effects can be noticed at TF1 binding ratios less than 1 TF1 dimer/500 DNA base pairs, and the measured torsional rigidity at high TF1 binding ratios (1 TF1 dimer/15-20 DNA base pairs) is about 7 times greater than in the absence of TF1. On the basis of a discussion of various mechanisms for the observed effect we argue that it is due to protein-induced DNA bending at low binding densities although other explanations are also possible. This interpretation might have implications for understanding the biological function of TF1.    The gene coding for the raw-starch-digesting amylase from Bacillus sp. B1018 was cloned into Escherichia coli, and its nucleotide sequence was determined. Starting at an ATG codon, there was an open reading frame composed of 2139 bp (713 amino acids). The NH2-terminal portion encoded a 27 amino acid-long signal peptide. S1 mapping revealed the presence of a typical promoter region upstream from the transcription initiation site. The deduced amino acid sequence of the extracellular mature enzyme was very similar to those of cyclodextrin glucanotransferases (CGTases), especially that of alkalophilic Bacillus sp. 1011 (87% homology). In fact, the B1018 amylase showed CGTase activity. The COOH-terminal portion of the B1018 amylase shows significant homology with other raw-starch-digesting enzymes.    The monofunctional chorismate mutase from Bacillus subtilis has been purified 2200-fold to homogeneity. The enzyme is a homodimer of subunit Mr = 14,500 and is the smallest natural chorismate mutase that has been characterized. The purified enzyme follows Michaelis-Menten kinetics with a Km of 100 microM and a kcat of 50 s-1, carries no other associated enzymic activities, and is unaffected by any of the aromatic amino acids. The N-terminal amino acid sequence of the protein has been determined, and this information has been used to construct a precise oligonucleotide probe for the gene by means of in vitro DNA amplification from total chromosomal DNA by the polymerase chain reaction. The cloned aroH gene encodes a protein of 127 amino acid residues and is expressed in Escherichia coli. The cloned gene product is indistinguishable from that purified from Bacillus. The aroH coding region was directly subcloned into a phagemid expression vector by means of the polymerase chain reaction. The resulting construct, with the aroH gene positioned behind efficient transcription and translation initiation sequences of E. coli, results in the production of the monofunctional mutase at levels of 30-35% of the soluble cell protein in E. coli transformants. Chorismate mutases comprise a set of functionally related proteins that show little sequence similarity to each other. This diversity stands in contrast to other chorismate-utilizing enzymes.    A number of cell-surface proteins are anchored by a phosphatidylinositol (PI)-glycan moiety. These proteins can be released by PI-specific phospholipases C (PI-PLC). Decay-accelerating factor (DAF) is such a cell-surface protein that protects cells from inadvertent complement attack by binding to and inactivating C3 and C5 convertases. We have studied the regulation of DAF synthesis in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC), a cell that has the highest level of surface DAF among those human cells that have been studied. HUVEC DAF was measured by immunoradiometric assay of detergent extracts and of cell supernatants after treatment of cells with a bacterial (Bacillus thuringiensis) PI-PLC. Eighty percent of the HUVEC DAF (4 to 8 x 10(5) molecules/cell) was released by exogenously added PI-PLC, indicating that it is predominantly PI-anchored. The level of PI-PLC-sensitive HUVEC DAF was increased three- to fourfold by overnight treatment of cultures with the protein kinase C activators, PMA (1 to 10 nM), phorbol-12,13-dibutyrate (10 to 100 nM), and teleocidin A (1 to 10 nM) under conditions where cell number, protein, and lactate dehydrogenase remain unchanged. This DAF synthesis was blocked by the protein kinase C inhibitor K-252a in a dose-dependent manner (ED50 = 0.06 microM). The biologically inactive phorbols, 4-alpha-phorbol-12 myristate-13-acetate (1 microM) and 4-alpha-phorbol-12, 13-didecanoate (1 microM) did not increase DAF levels. The newly expressed DAF in PMA-stimulated cells was still largely PI-anchored. In contrast, another PI-anchored protein, alkaline phosphatase, was not altered by PMA treatment, demonstrating that the PMA effect is not uniform among all surface proteins. The increased expression of DAF only was evident 8 h after PMA addition and was blocked by the RNA and protein synthesis inhibitors, actinomycin D and cycloheximide, indicating that both transcription and translation are required for DAF synthesis induced by phorbol esters. It is concluded that protein kinase C activators cause selective induction of endothelial cell DAF and that DAF synthesis involves protein kinase C activation.    The genes of the fumarate reductase of Wolinella succinogenes are organized in an operon. The three structural genes in the order frdC, frdA, frdB, are preceded by a common promoter (Kortner et al. 1990) and followed by a terminator of transcription. The proteins encoded by the genes are identical with the subunits present in the isolated enzyme. FrdA and FrdB are hydrophilic proteins consisting of 656 and 238 amino acids, respectively. The 12 cysteine residues present in FrdB form 3 ferredoxin-like clusters, whereas the 12 cysteines of FrdA are not clustered. Expression of FrdA and FrdB in Escherichia coli from a plasmid containing a DNA fragment with both genes in full length, gave rise to the EPR signals of the bi- and trinuclear iron-sulfur centers of the enzyme. Only the binuclear center was seen on the expression of FrdB together with a C-terminal fragment of FrdA (130 amino acid residues). Neither of the two centers was detected on the expression of FrdA together with a N-terminal fragment of FrdB including cysteine cluster I. Sequence comparison of FrdA and FrdB with the corresponding subunits of the fumarate reductases of E. coli or Proteus vulgaris or to those of the succinate dehydrogenases of E. coli or Bacillus subtilis revealed strong homologies (28-36% identical amino acid residues). Part of the homologous peptide stretches could be assigned to domains that are involved in the binding of the substrate of the FAD prosthetic group of the enzyme.    Portable expression units for intracellular formation of heterologous proteins in Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis were constructed by inserting the transcription and translation initiation signals of the staphylokinase sak42D gene into the polylinker of plasmid pUC18. Fusions with ATG-gene cassettes coding for mature human interferons (hIFN) alpha 1 and alpha 2 resulted in intracellular expression of both proteins in E. coli. The 20 fold lower yield of hIFN alpha 2 was not due to unfavorable mRNA secondary structure formation as ruled out by constructing a hybrid hIFN alpha 1/alpha 2 gene. Intracellular expression of IFN alpha 1 in B. subtilis reached 6 x 10(4) IU/ml. Nuclease S1 mapping of transcriptional start sites revealed differential promoter usage in E. coli and B. subtilis. In E. coli transcription from the sak42D promoter was drastically reduced by by transcription initiating from upstream lac and tet promoters. In contrast, in B. subtilis transcription proceeded exclusively from the sak42D promoter.    The Bacillus subtilis spoIIJ locus is defined by a Tn917 insertion which leads to an oligosporogenous phenotype. Here we show that this mutation severely decreases transcription of spoIIA, spoIIE, and spoIIG, three operons involved in asymmetric septation, the earliest morphological event of sporulation. A 14.3-kilobase region overlapping the site of the spoIIJ::Tn917 insertion was cloned and the exact location of the spoIIJ gene was defined with various integrative plasmids carrying subfragments of that region. DNA sequencing established that spoIIJ is a monocistronic locus encoding a 606-amino-acid polypeptide which contains a canonical &quot;transmitter&quot; domain, indicating that spoIIJ is a new member of the &quot;sensor&quot; class of signal-transducing systems in bacteria. Thus, spoIIj, which is transcribed during vegetative growth, presumably under the control of sigma H, encodes a protein that could interact with major regulators of early sporulation stages, such as SpoOA and/or SpoOF.    The gene for a sigma factor (rpoD) was cloned from Myxococcus xanthus, a soil bacterium which differentiates to form fruiting bodies upon starvation for nutrients. The DNA sequence of the gene was determined, and an open reading frame encoding a polypeptide of 708 amino acid residues (Mr = 80,391) was identified. Except for the amino-terminal sequence consisting of 100 residues, the M. xanthus sigma factor (sigma-80) showed extensive similarity with Escherichia coli sigma-70 as well as Bacillus subtilis sigma-43. In particular, the carboxy-terminal sequence of 242 residues that is known to be required for promoter recognition and core recognition showed 78 and 72% amino acid sequence identity with the E. coli and B. subtilis sigma factors, respectively. The putative RpoD protein was detected at the position of an apparent molecular weight of 86,000 by Western blot (immunoblot) analysis by using antiserum against B. subtilis sigma-43, which agreed well with the position of a vegetative sigma factor of M. xanthus previously identified by Rudd and Zusman (K. Rudd and D. R. Zusman, J. Bacteriol. 151:89-105, 1982).    The regulatory gene (degT) from Bacillus stearothermophilus NCA1503 which enhanced production of extracellular alkaline protease (Apr) was cloned in Bacillus subtilis with pTB53 as a vector. When B. subtilis MT-2 (Npr- [deficiency of neutral protease] Apr+) was transformed with the recombinant plasmid, pDT145, the plasmid carrier produced about three times more alkaline protease than did the wild-type strain. In contrast, when B. subtilis DB104 (Npr- Apr-) was used as a host, the transformant with pDT145 could not exhibit any protease activity. After construction of the deletion plasmids, DNA sequencing was done. A large open reading frame was found, and nucleotide sequence analysis showed that the degT gene was composed of 1,116 bases (372 amino acid residues, molecular weight of 41,244). A Shine-Dalgarno sequence was found nine bases upstream from the open reading frame. A B. subtilis strain carrying degT showed the following pleiotropic phenomena: (i) enhancement of production of extracellular enzymes such as alkaline protease and levansucrase, (ii) repression of autolysin activity, (iii) decrease of transformation efficiency for B. subtilis (competent cell procedure), (iv) altered control of sporulation, (v) loss of flagella, and (vi) abnormal cell division. When B. stearothermophilus SIC1 was transformed with the recombinant plasmid carrying degT, the transformants exhibited abnormal cell division. These phenomena are similar to those of the phenotypes of degSU(Hy) (hyperproduction), degQ(Hy), and degR mutants of B. subtilis. However, the amino acid sequence of the degT product (DegT) is different from those of the reported gene products. Furthermore, DegT includes a hydrophobic core region in the N-terminal portion (amino acid numbers 50 to 160), a consensus sequence for a DNA binding region (amino acid numbers 160 to 179), and a region homologous to transcription activator proteins (amino acid numbers 351 to 366). We discuss the possibility that the membrane protein DegT functions as a sensor protein and transfers the signal of environmental stimuli to the regulatory region of target genes to activate or repress transcription of the genes.    Several species of the genus Bacillus produce peptide antibiotics which are synthesized either through a ribosomal or non-ribosomal mechanism. The antibiotics gramicidin, tyrocidine, and bacitracin are synthesized nonribosomally by the multienzyme thiotemplate mechanism. Surfactin and mycobacillin are also synthesized nonribosomally but by a mechanism that, apparently, is distinct from that of the multienzyme thiotemplate. Other antibiotics such as subtilin are gene encoded and are ribosomally synthesized. Molecular genetic and DNA sequence analysis have shown that biosynthesis genes for some antibiotics are clustered into polycistronic transcription units and are under the control of global regulatory systems that govern the expression of genes that are induced when Bacillus cells enter stationary phase of growth. Future experiments involving the molecular dissection of peptide antibiotic biosynthesis genes in Bacillus will be attempted in hopes of further examining the mechanism and regulation of antibiotic production.    The gene ldh, encoding L-lactate dehydrogenase (LDH; EC 1.1.1.27) of Bifidobacterium longum aM101-2, was cloned in Escherichia coli using an oligodeoxyribonucleotide hybridization probe. The amino acid (aa) sequence, deduced from the sequence of the cloned DNA, was consistent with the results of protein chemical analysis of B. longum LDH. The transcription start points (tsp) in B. longum were identified by S1 nuclease mapping. A sequence, GTAGCAA-(14 bp)-TTATAGA, which is located a few bp upstream from the tsp, was assigned as the promoter of this ldh gene. In the 3&apos;-noncoding region, there were two structures that strongly resembled the Rho-independent transcriptional termination signal of E. coli. Therefore, the B. longum ldh gene might form a monocistronic unit. The deduced primary structure of B. longum LDH had 40% identity with LDHs from Thermus caldophilus, Bacillus stearothermophilus, Lactobacillus casei and dogfish muscle. Most bacterial LDHs are allosterically regulated by fructose 1,6-bisphosphate (FBP), while the vertebrate LDHs are not. The anion-binding site of vertebrate LDHs has been thought to correspond to the FBP-binding site of bacterial LDHs. Although the B. longum LDH was regulated by FBP, the charge properties of aa residues in the putative FBP-binding site of the LDH were closer to those of the vertebrate LDHs than to those of bacterial LDHs.    ermC is an inducible antibiotic resistance gene from Staphylococcus aureus, one of several whose expression is regulated at the level of mRNA secondary structure. During induction of ermC, the inhibition of a ribosome active in translation of a short leader peptide by low levels of antibiotic belonging to the macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin b family is believed to cause a rearrangement in mRNA secondary structure. The resultant conformational isomerization unmasks the methylase ribosome binding site and initiator Met codon, causing increased translation of the ermC transcript. Expression of ermC can also be demonstrated in Bacillus subtilis carrying plasmid pE194. To probe the ermC transcript in vivo during induction, ermC was transferred to B. subtilis by transformation and the resultant transformants were treated with dimethyl sulfate which reacts with N-1 of adenine and N-3 of cytosine residues in a manner that is sensitive to secondary structure. The bases modified in vivo were detected by primer extension with reverse transcriptase using total cellular RNA as template and a complementary ermC-specific oligonucleotide as primer. Physical evidence was obtained for the secondary structural rearrangements predicted by the ermC regulatory model. Additionally, physical evidence was obtained demonstrating that during induction, the stalled ribosome protects codons 9 and 10 of the leader peptide from modification by dimethyl sulfate, in agreement with genetic data obtained previously that identified the integrity of codons 5-9 as critical for induction of ermC by erythromycin.    A transcript, of about 650 nucleotides (nt), from the Streptomyces subtilisin-inhibitor-encoding gene (ssi) was identified by Northern hybridization analysis in both the original strain, S. albogriseolus S-3253, and the transformant, S. lividans 66, carrying an expression plasmid with the cloned ssi gene, pJS1. These results were quite consistent with the analysis of the major transcriptional start point (tsp; at nt 429) by primer extension experiments and the transcriptional end point (at nt 1065) by S1 nuclease mapping of the ssi gene. Deletion experiments on the 5&apos;-flanking region of the major tsp suggested that two promoter sequences control the expression of ssi. The more proximal of these putative promoters appears to be homologous to the -45 to -25 region of the ctc promoter in Bacillus subtilis and includes a direct repeat in the -10 region.    The construction of allele-specific suppressor mutations has enabled us to demonstrate that a sporulation-specific transcription unit in Bacillus subtilis, the spoIIG operon, is transcribed by a form of RNA polymerase associated with sigma A, the principal sigma factor in vegetative cells. The spoIIG operon encodes sporulation-specific factor sigma E, and its transcription is directed from a promoter that is activated about 1 hr after the onset of endospore formation. This promoter contains sequences that are similar to those found at the -10 and -35 regions of promoters that are used by sigma A-associated RNA polymerase, but these sigma A-like recognition sequences are separated by 22 base pairs rather than the typical 17 or 18 base pairs. We have found that substitution of an arginyl residue for the glutamyl residue at position 196 of sigma A (Glu-196----Arg) suppresses the deleterious effect of a thymidine-to-cytidine base substitution at position -11 in the spoIIG promoter. This suppression was allele-specific, since it did not suppress the effects of base substitutions in other positions in the spoIIG promoter or the effects of a thymidine-to-guanosine change at -11. These results support a model in which a form of RNA polymerase containing sigma A is utilized in an unusual manner to activate the transcription of the spoIIG operon well after the onset of endospore formation.    Transcription of the Bacillus subtilis gene coding of glutamine synthetase (glnA) is regulated by the nitrogen source. The glnA gene lies in an operon in which it is preceded by an open reading frame with the potential to encode a polypeptide of approximately 16,000 Mr. We have now shown that this open reading frame is utilized in vivo, that its product (GlnR) acts as a diffusible, negative regulator of gln transcription, and that GlnR is likely to be a DNA-binding protein. Certain mutations in glnR, including a large, in-frame deletion and a start codon mutation, led to high-level constitutivity of the operon; other mutations caused low-level constitutivity. These latter mutations, which affected the C terminus of GlnR, seemed to disrupt response to the nitrogen source without eliminating the ability of GlnR to bind to DNA. Wild-type GlnR by itself, however, did not impose nitrogen-dependent regulation; such regulation also required the product of glnA. A model is presented in which glutamine synthetase monitors the availability of nitrogen and imposes negative regulation by interaction with or modification of GlnR.    The relative LD50 values in two test Lepidoptera of Bacillus thuringiensis subspecies kurstaki HD1, which contains three crylA protoxin genes, was the same as a plasmid-cured derivative or a Bacillus cereus transcipient containing only one of the three genes. Differential rates of transcription of these genes in the original strain could account, at least partly, for this result. Strains containing only the single protoxin gene (crylA(b] produced inclusions when grown at 25 degrees C but not 32 degrees C, despite transcription of this gene at both temperatures. The instability of the crylA(b) protoxin was not found in the parental B. thuringiensis subsp. kurstaki HD1 strain grown at either temperature, however, so kurstaki HD1 strains with multiple protoxin genes must produce some stabilizing factor, perhaps another protoxin. The cryl protoxins contain a highly conserved carboxyl half which is proteolytically removed upon conversion to toxin. All of the protoxin cysteines are present in protease-sensitive regions and they are oxidized in inclusions. Most of the disulphides appear to be essential for specificity since their reduction in the crylA(b) protoxin resulted in loss of selectivity for one of the test insects. This lack of specificity was also found for this protoxin produced by an Escherichia coli clone, probably because of the reducing conditions in these cells. Specificity was restored by reoxidation of the pure protoxin, by removal of the carboxyl half of oxidized protoxin with trypsin, or by subcloning of the toxin portion. The oxidized form of protoxins must be important for specificity, for the formation of crystalline inclusions, and probably for interactions required for the stabilization of some protoxins.    The plc gene encoding the alpha-toxin (phospholipase C), an important virulence factor of Clostridium perfringens, has been cloned, sequenced and expressed in Escherichia coli. Transcriptional analysis of mRNAs produced in vivo by C. perfringens and E. coli, and in vitro using purified RNA polymerase from C. perfringens revealed that plc is transcribed constitutively from a single promoter situated about 100 nucleotides from the coding sequence. A T7 expression system was used to overproduce alpha-toxin in E. coli; enzymological studies with the amplified plc gene product unambiguously demonstrated that both lecithinase (phospholipase C) and sphingomyelinase activities were associated with this 43,000 dalton cytotoxin. The 370-residue alpha-toxin is haemolytic and shares sequence and functional homology with the two components of Bacillus cereus haemolysin, cereolysin AB, in which phospholipase C and sphingomyelinase activities are associated with different polypeptides.    The abrB gene of Bacillus subtilis is believed to encode a repressor that controls the expression of genes involved in starvation-induced processes such as sporulation and the production of antibiotics and degradative enzymes. Two such genes, spoVG, a sporulation gene of B. subtilis, and tycA, which encodes tyrocidine synthetase I of the tyrocidine biosynthetic pathway in Bacillus brevis, are negatively regulated by abrB in B. subtilis. To examine the role of abrB in the repression of gene transcription, the AbrB protein was purified and then tested for its ability to bind to spoVG and tycA promoter DNA. In a gel mobility shift experiment, AbrB was found to bind to a DNA fragment containing the sequence from -95 to +61 of spoVG. AbrB protein exhibited reduced affinity for DNA of two mutant forms of the spoVG promoter that had been shown to be insensitive to abrB-dependent repression in vivo. These studies showed that an upstream A + T-rich sequence from -37 to -95 was required for optimal AbrB binding. AbrB protein was also observed to bind to the tycA gene within a region between the transcription start site and the tycA coding sequence as well as to a region containing the putative tycA promoter. These findings reinforce the hypothesis that AbrB represses gene expression through its direct interaction with the transcription initiation regions of genes under its control.    comC is a Bacillus subtilis gene required for the development of genetic competence. We have cloned a fragment from the B. subtilis chromosome that carries comC and contains all the information required to complement a Tn917lac insertion in comC. Genetic tests further localized comC to a 2.0-kilobase HindIII fragment. Northern (RNA) blotting experiments revealed that an 800-base-pair comC-specific transcript appeared at the time of transition from exponential to stationary phase during growth through the competence regimen. The DNA sequence of the comC region revealed two open reading frames (ORFs), transcribed in the same direction. The upstream ORF encoded a protein with apparent sequence similarity to the folC gene of Escherichia coli. Insertion of a chloramphenicol resistance determinant into this ORF and integration of the disrupted construct into the bacterial chromosome by replacement did not result in competence deficiency. The downstream ORF, which contained the Tn917lac insertion that resulted in a lack of competence, is therefore the comC gene. The predicted protein product of comC consisted of 248 amino acid residues and was quite hydrophobic. The comC gene product was not required for the expression of any other com genes tested, and this fact, together with the marked hydrophobicity of ComC, suggests that it may be a component of the DNA-processing apparatus of competent cells.    Gene expression during endospore formation in Bacillus subtilis is compartmentalized between the mother-cell and forespore chambers of the sporangium, which follow separate pathways of cellular differentiation. The earliest acting regulatory gene so far identified in the mother-cell line of gene expression is spoIIID, whose product is required for the transcription of the composite gene (sigK) encoding the mother-cell RNA polymerase sigma-factor sigma K and for the chromosomal rearrangement that gives rise to the composite gene. Here we report the nucleotide sequence of spoIIID and studies on the temporal, spatial, and genetic control of its expression during sporulation. We show that the deduced spoIIID gene product, a 93-residue-long polypeptide, is a previously identified transcription factor that is known to activate the promoter for the sigK gene in vitro. Expression of spoIIID is largely confined to the mother-cell chamber of the sporangium and is turned on at, or shortly before, the time (hour 3 of sporulation) that the mother-cell chromosome is rearranged and transcription of the sigK gene commences. This gene expression depends strongly on the sporulation sigma-factor sigma E and partially on the spoIIID gene product, itself. We conclude that the timing and compartmentalization of the rearrangement and transcription of the sigK gene and, hence, of subsequent gene activation in the mother cell, are, in part, direct consequences of the temporal and spatial control of spoIIID gene expression.    The fumarase gene (citG) of Bacillus subtilis is transcribed from two promoter regions, citGp1 and citGp2 (P1 and P2); the P2 promoter is used by the E sigma H form of RNA polymerase. In order to study the role of P1 and P2 in citG expression, the promoter region and various deletion derivatives that effectively separate P1 and P2 were fused to the Escherichia coli beta-galactosidase gene (lacZ) and introduced into the chromosome in single copy at the amyE locus. P1 functioned to provide a relatively low and stable basal level of fumarase activity throughout growth. In contrast, P2 activity was found to vary over at least a 50-fold range and was responsible for regulating fumarase activity during growth and sporulation in a rich medium and in response to changes in carbon source. To further investigate the role of sigma H in fumarase regulation, citGp2-lacZ fusions were introduced into a strain in which the expression of the chromosomal spoOH gene was under the control of the isopropylthiogalactopyranoside-inducible spac promoter. Induction of pspac did not lead to P2 induction, suggesting that citG expression is not regulated at the level of spoOH transcription.    The RNA polymerase sigma factor sigma H is essential for the onset of endospore formation in Bacillus subtilis. sigma H also is required for several additional stationary-phase-specific responses, including the normal expression of several genes that are required for the development of competence for DNA uptake. It is necessary to identify the genes that are transcribed by sigma H RNA polymerase (E sigma H) in order to understand the role of this sigma factor during the transition from exponential growth to stationary phase. Feavers et al. (Mol. Gen. Genet. 211:465-471, 1988) proposed that citG, the structural gene for fumarase, is transcribed from two promoters, one of which (citGp2 [P2]) may be used by E sigma H. It is likely that the citGp2 promoter is used by E sigma H because we found that this promoter was used accurately in vitro by E sigma H and directed expression of xylE in vivo. This xylE expression was dependent on spo0H, the structural gene for sigma H, and was independent of the citGp1 promoter. Comparison of the nucleotide sequences of several sigma H-dependent promoters showed that these sequences were similar at two regions approximately 10 and 35 base pairs upstream from the start points of transcription. These sequences may signal recognition of these promoters by E sigma H. Primer extension analyses were used to examine transcription from three sigma H-dependent promoters during growth and sporulation. The citGp2 promoter appeared to be active during the middle and late stages of exponential growth, whereas activation of the spoIIA promoter was delayed until after the end of exponential growth. Evidently, promoters used by E sigma H can display different temporal patterns of expression.    We have utilized Bacillus subtilis phage SPO-1 DNA as a model of irradiated DNA. In this phage, all thymine (Thy) residues are replaced by 5-(hydroxymethyl)uracil (5HmUra), which is a known irradiation-induced derivative of DNA Thy. SPO-1 phage is naturally devoid of other such irradiation-induced DNA lesions. DNase I activated SPO-1 phage DNA served as well as, or even better than, the control DNAs (Bacillus subtilis DNA and calf thymus DNA) as a template-primer for Escherichia coli, Micrococcus luteus, and human HL-60 cell DNA polymerases. Furthermore, the template activity of SPO-1 phage DNA was also superior when transcription with E. coli RNA polymerase was investigated. The results reported here indicated that the replacement of Thy by 5HmUra is not deleterious to template and primer functions during DNA or RNA synthesis.    RAP30/74 is a heteromeric general transcription initiation factor which binds to RNA polymerase II. Here we report that preparations of RAP30/74 contain an ATP-dependent DNA helicase whose probable function is to melt the DNA at transcriptional start sites. The sequence of the RAP30 subunit of RAP30/74 indicates that RAP30 may be distantly related to bacterial sigma factors.    We characterized a segment of chromosomal DNA from Bacillus subtilis that was required for the development of genetic competence. The chromosomal DNA was cloned from a group of genetically linked and phenotypically similar Tn917lac insertion mutants deficient in competence. This cluster of mutations defined the comG locus. Chromosomal DNA flanking each of the six insertions was cloned. Restriction maps of the cloned plasmids revealed that their chromosomal inserts consisted of overlapping fragments. These data, together with Southern blots of chromosomal DNA from the comG mutants, showed that the six Tn917lac comG insertions occurred in the following order: comG12, comG39, comG412, comG107, comG56, and comG210. Expression of the comG Tn917lac insertions was from a promoter located upstream from the first insertion, comG12. This was determined genetically and by low-resolution S1 nuclease mapping of the 3&apos; terminus. The comG region spanned about 5 kilobase pairs, based on low-resolution S1 nuclease mapping of the transcription terminator and Northern blotting. The comG12 mutation had a partial epistatic effect on the expression of one other com locus, comE, but none of the other comG mutations affected expression of this or any other com gene tested. Based on these conclusions, and on its size and phenotype, the comG locus must be organized as a polycistronic operon that is subject to competence-specific regulation.    We have constructed a plasmid, pQS1, in which a mouse dihydrofolate reductase (5,6,7,8-tetrahydrofolate:NADP:oxidoreductase; EC 1.5.1.3; DHFR) cDNA is inserted in the unique PstI site of a gram-positive/gram-negative shuttle vector derived from pBR322. The cDNA is expressed under the control of the bla promoter, which, like most gram-negative bacterial genes, is considered not to be expressed in Bacillus subtilis, and its coding sequence is translated from a polycistronic message. We have selected in vivo and studied, in Escherichia coli and B. subtilis, expression mutants with promoter and ribosome binding site sequence mutations. One promoter mutation changes the third nucleotide of the -35 region from a C to a G. As expected, this substitution results in increased transcriptional activity in E. coli. In B. subtilis, this mutation induces the accumulation not only of a low but significant amount of dhfr mRNA but also of DHFR, demonstrating that binding strengths with a free energy as low as -9.4 kcal/mol are sufficient to promote ribosome binding in B. subtilis. The association of the promoter mutation (C-G) with a mutation which creates a strong B. subtilis ribosome binding site (-21 kcal/mol) results in the accumulation of a large amount of dhfr mRNA. This demonstrates the importance of having an efficient ribosome binding site in the evaluation of promoter function: for example, with this strong ribosome binding site we can show that the wild-type bla promoter is recognized by the B. subtilis transcription machinery.    spoII mutants formed heat-resistant spores when transformed with spo+ DNa near the start of sporulation. Many of the spores formed remained genetically spoII. It is deduced from this result and previous epistasis experiments that the spoII loci are transcribed before the spore septum is formed.    A series of Tn917lac insertions define the comG region of the Bacillus subtilis chromosome. comG mutants are deficient in competence and specifically in the binding of exogenous DNA. The genes included in the comG region are first expressed during the transition from the exponential to the stationary growth phase. From nucleotide sequence information, it was concluded that the comG locus contains seven open reading frames (ORFs), several of which overlap at their termini. High-resolution S1 nuclease mapping and primer extension were used to identify the 5&apos; terminus of the comG mRNA. The sequence upstream from the comG start site closely resembled the consensus recognition sequence for the major B. subtilis vegetative RNA polymerase holoenzyme. Complementation analysis confirmed that the comG ORF1 protein is required for the ability of competent cultures to resolve into two populations with different cell densities on Renografin (E. R. Squibb &amp; Sons, Princeton, N.J.) gradients, as well as for full expression of comE, another late competence locus. The predicted comG ORF1 protein showed significant similarity to the virB ORF11 protein from Agrobacterium tumefaciens, which is probably involved in T-DNA transfer. The N-terminal sequences of comG ORF3 and, to a lesser extent, the comG ORF4 and ORF5 proteins were similar to a class of pilin proteins from members of the genera Bacteroides, Pseudomonas, Neisseria, and Moraxella. All of the comG proteins except comG ORF1 possessed hydrophobic domains that were potentially capable of spanning the bacterial membrane. It is likely that these proteins are membrane associated, and they may comprise part of the DNA transport machinery. When present in multiple copies, a DNA fragment carrying the comG promoter was capable of inhibiting the development of competence as well as the expression of several late com genes, suggesting a role for a transcriptional activator in the expression of those genes.    The complete nucleotide sequences of the comA and comB loci of Bacillus subtilis were determined. The products of these genes are required for the development of competence in B. subtilis and for the expression of late-expressing competence genes. The major 5&apos; termini of both the comA and comB transcripts were determined. The inferred promoters of both comA and comB contained sequences that were similar to those found at the -10 and -35 regions of promoters that are used by sigma A-RNA polymerase, the primary form of this enzyme in vegetative cells. The comB gene was located approximately 3 kilobase pairs upstream of the comA gene and encoded a 409-amino-acid protein with a predicted molecular weight of 46,693. The comA locus contained two open reading frames (ORFs) and comB contained one ORF. The predicted amino acid sequence of the comA ORF1 gene product consisted of 214 amino acids, with an aggregate molecular weight of 24,132. The ORF1 product was required for competence, while ORF2, which was cotranscribed with ORF1 and encoded a predicted protein of 126 amino acids, was not. The predicted protein sequence of the comA ORF1 gene product was found to be similar to that of several members of the effector class of procaryotic signal transducers. The C-terminal portion of the predicted comA sequence contained a possible helix-turn-helix motif, which is characteristic of DNA-binding proteins. comA ORF1 was cloned on a multicopy plasmid and was shown to complement the competence-deficient phenotype caused by the comA124 insertion of Tn917lac. Also, the presence of comA ORF1 in multiple copies interfered with sporulation. Anti-peptide antibodies raised to the predicted product of comA ORF1 reacted strongly with a single protein band of about 24,000 daltons in immunoblots. The possible roles of multiple signal transduction systems in triggering the development of competence are discussed.    The DNA sequence of about 5.9 kilobase pairs (kbp) of the gramicidin S biosynthesis operon (grs) was determined. Three open reading frames were identified; the corresponding genes, called grsT, grsA, and grsB, were found to be organized in one transcriptional unit, not two as previously reported (M. Krause and M. A. Marahiel, J. Bacteriol. 170:4669-4674, 1988). The entire nucleotide sequence of grsA, coding for the 126.663-kilodalton gramicidin S synthetase 1, grsT, encoding a 29.191-kilodalton protein of unknown function, and 732 bp of the 5&apos; end of grsB, encoding the gramicidin S synthetase 2, were determined. A single initiation site of transcription 81 bp upstream of the grsT initiation condon GTG was identified by high-resolution S1 mapping studies. The sequence of the grsA gene product showed a high degree of homology to the tyrocidine synthetase 1 (TycA protein), and that of grsT exhibited a significant degree of homology to vertebrate fatty acid thioesterases.    The Bacillus subtilis phage phi 105 repressor, a lambda repressor-like transcriptional regulatory protein, was overproduced in Escherichia coli and purified to near homogeneity in order to examine its in vitro DNA-binding properties. The active form of repressor appears to be a tetramer. DNase I protection experiments demonstrate that repressor can specifically bind to six distinct sites, all located within the phi 105 EcoRI-F immunity region (immF). Three of these sites had been identified earlier as functional operators by genetic analysis. They share a common 14-base pair, asymmetric &quot;core&quot; sequence, 5&apos;-GACGGAAATACAAG-3&apos;, termed OR. The three additional sites show significant homology with OR. For an individual binding site, hydroxyl-radical footprinting reveals symmetrical repressor-DNA interactions established via one side of the helix. Dimethyl sulfate protection indicates that guanines at the conserved OR base pair positions 1, 3, and 4 may participate in sequence-specific interactions with repressor in agreement with a previously proposed recognition model. However, since the OR sequence is not symmetrical with respect to this GNCG motif, at present it remains difficult to completely understand the molecular basis of this interaction.    From a genomic library of the tyrocidine producer Bacillus brevis ATCC 8185 constructed in the bacteriophage vector EMBL3, a recombinant phage which contains the structural genes coding for tyrocidine synthetases 1 and 2, TycA and TycB, was identified. The location of the tycA gene within the 16-kilobase insert of this clone, EMBL25-1, was mapped by hybridization studies by using the previously isolated tycA DNA as a probe. Restriction analyses, the construction of subclones, and the analysis of proteins encoded by the subclones located the tycB gene at the 3&apos; end of the tycA gene and revealed that the two genes are transcribed in the same direction. Nuclease S1 protection studies and DNA sequencing studies of the intergenic region indicated that tycA and tycB are separated by a 94-base-pair noncoding region and suggested that these genes are organized as an operon.    Mutations that define the ctaA gene of Bacillus subtilis block cytochrome aa3 formation and sporulation. We have recently described the isolation and initial characterization of the ctaA locus. Analysis of in vivo mRNA transcripts by RNase protection experiments located the 5&apos; and 3&apos; termini of the ctaA transcript, confirming a monocistronic structure. By using a nuclease protection assay, an increase in the abundance of steady-state ctaA mRNA was observed during the initiation of sporulation, followed by a decrease during subsequent stages. Transcripts originating from the ctaA gene were most abundant 2.0 h after the end of exponential growth. This pattern of ctaA mRNA accumulation was confirmed by coupling the transcription of the ctaA gene to lacZ in an integrative plasmid vector. Expression of ctaA was not repressed by glucose and was independent of the spoOA and spoOH (sigH) gene products. Postexponential expression was found to be dependent on the product of the strC gene. The expression of ctaA appears to be regulated in a growth stage-specific manner. The transcriptional start site, identified by high-resolution S1 nuclease protection experiments, was preceded by a single sigma A-dependent promoter sequence.    Nitrogen source regulation of glutamate synthase activity in Bacillus subtilis occurs at the level of transcription of the gltA and gltB genes, which encode the two subunits of the enzyme. We show here that transcription of gltA requires the product of gltC, a gene whose transcription is divergent from that of gltA and whose transcriptional control sequences overlap those of gltA. gltC mutants had decreased, aberrantly regulated levels of glutamate synthase activity and decreased gltA mRNA. The gltC gene product could act in trans to complement both these defects. In addition, the gltC gene product repressed its own transcription. The DNA sequence of gltC revealed that its putative product is very similar to a number of positive regulatory proteins from gram-negative bacteria (the LysR family).    Deletions generated following stimulation by the deletion hot spot of plasmid pHV15-1 were studied in Bacillus subtilis. Nucleotide sequencing showed that deletions extend between short direct repeat sequences. Such direct repeat sequences may have homology to the sequence of the hot spot. Deletion formation is recE-independent, but requires an active exonuclease V (AddAB) enzyme. Other structural parameters like plasmid size and structure influence deletion formation.    The nucleotide sequence of the Bacillus anthracis lethal factor (LF) gene (lef) has been determined. LF is part of the tripartite protein exotoxin of B. anthracis along with protective antigen (PA) and edema factor (EF). The apparent ATG start codon, which is located immediately upstream from codons which specify the first 16 amino acids (aa) of the mature secreted LF, is preceded by an AAAGGAG sequence, which is its probable ribosome-binding site. This ATG codon begins a continuous 2427-bp open reading frame which encodes the 809-aa LF-precursor protein with an Mr of 93,798. The mature secreted protein (776 aa; Mr 90,237) was preceded by a 33-aa signal peptide which has characteristics in common with leader peptides for other secreted proteins of the Bacillus species. The codon usage of the LF gene reflects its high (70%) A + T content. The N-terminus of LF (first 300 aa) shared extensive homology with the N-terminus of the anthrax EF protein. Since LF and EF each bind PA at the same site, these homologous regions probably represent their common PA-binding domains.    Zabarovsky and Allikmets [Gene 42 (1986) 119-123] have described a cloning procedure based on partial filling-in of vector and target DNA cohesive ends, which strongly enriches for recombinant molecules with single insertions. Improved Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage phi 105 vectors containing unique cloning sites for SalI have been constructed to take advantage of the partial fill-in method. The new vectors have been used to construct B. subtilis genomic libraries from which several sporulation loci have been isolated, including five not previously cloned. On inserting a promoterless lacZ gene into the cloning site, beta-galactosidase (beta Gal) was detected at a late stage in lytic phage growth, indicating that phage transcription is directed through the cloning site. When UV-irradiated cells (&apos;maxicells&apos;) were infected with the recombinant phage containing the lacZ gene, in the presence of labelled amino acids, a protein of the expected Mr for beta Gal was visualised, in addition to the phage proteins. This system should provide a useful general approach for the identification of the products of cloned genes from B. subtilis and other Gram-positive organisms.    A gene, designated msp, that encodes a major secreted polypeptide with a molecular mass of approximately 60 kilodaltons (kDa) was cloned from Listeria monocytogenes 10403. DNA hybridization analysis indicated that the msp gene was highly conserved among 15 independent L. monocytogenes isolates and that each of 5 isolates tested secreted a 60-kDa polypeptide that was immunologically related to the msp gene product. DNA sequences related to msp were not detected in any other Listeria species or in strains of Bacillus cereus, Bacillus thuringiensis, Streptococcus pyogenes, or Streptococcus pneumoniae when standard stringent DNA hybridization conditions were used. Under nonstringent conditions, related sequences were detected in Listeria ivanovii, Listeria seeligeri, and Listeria innocua, and immunoblot analysis indicated that these strains secreted polypeptides of about 60 kDa that were immunologically related to the msp gene product. The possibility of using the msp gene as a probe for the detection of L. monocytogenes and the potential functions of the msp gene product are discussed.    The spoIIIG gene encodes a sigma factor that determines prespore-specific gene expression during sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. Correct spatial and temporal expression of the spoIIIG gene depends on a number of other sporulation (spo) genes, but only one of these genes, spoIIIE, has a specific effect on spoIIIG expression and not on gene expression in the other differentiating cell, the mother cell. However, the spoIIIE gene is expressed predominantly before differentiation begins. Thus, its product must play an important role in sensing or determining the spatial localization of prespore-specific gene expression in this system.    The DNA-binding AbrB protein of Bacillus subtilis is an ambiactive transcriptional regulator of genes expressed during the transition state between vegetative growth and the onset of stationary phase and sporulation. Studies on the transcriptional control of AbrB synthesis using abrB-lacZ fusions indicated that the abrB gene was autoregulated. This was consistent with the observation that purified AbrB protein bound specifically to the promoter region of its own gene in DNase I protection experiments. The structural gene mutation abrB4 abolished the autoregulation and purified AbrB4 protein did not have the promoter binding properties associated with the wild-type protein. Both AbrB and AbrB4 proteins were shown to be hexamers of 10,500 Dalton subunits and subunit exchange occurred between the proteins in vitro. However, the presence of only one or two mutant subunits dramaticaly altered the DNA-binding ability of the multimeric protein. The results support a model in which autoregulation of the abrB gene is an important factor in preventing sporulation-associated genes from being expressed during vegetative growth.    The process of spore formation in the Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis is a simple developmental system controlled by 50 or more genes. The complex pattern of regulatory interactions between these genes is beginning to be elucidated. spoVJ is a poorly characterized locus in which mutations affect spore development at a relatively late stage (Stage V). We have now cloned and physically characterized the spoVJ locus, and analysed its expression by lacZ fusion. Expression of spoVJ is temporally delayed until about two hours after the initiation of sporulation. Its expression is also spatially restricted to the mother cell compartment; as such, it represents the earliest known mother-cell-specific event. Control of spoVJ transcription is complex: expression is dependent upon the products of all of the spoO genes and on some of the spoII genes but it is independent of all later genes except spoIIID. As spoIIID mutations do not affect prespore development, this gene must be an important early determinant of mother-cell-specific gene expression.    In Bacillus subtilis, arginine represses its biosynthetic enzymes and activates its catabolic ones via a regulator gene ahrC. A 6.2-kb EcoRI fragment of B. subtilis chromosomal DNA that includes the ahrC gene has previously been cloned. Gene ahrC was localised in a 0.8-kb HindIII sub-fragment whose nucleotide sequence was determined. An open reading frame (ORF) was present whose translated amino acid sequence showed homology to that of the Escherichia coli arginine repressor encoded by that organism&apos;s argR gene. That this ORF corresponded to ahrC was confirmed by (i) the location of the transposon in an ahrC::Tn917 insertion mutant within the ORF; and (ii) by the appearance of an AhrC- phenotype when plasmids carrying restriction fragments lying wholly within this ORF were permitted to integrate by Campbell-type recombination into the B. subtilis chromosome. This represents the first description of a repressor in a &apos;housekeeping&apos; biosynthetic system in a Bacillus, and indeed of homology between regulatory proteins for any &apos;housekeeping&apos; system across such a wide taxonomic barrier among prokaryotes.    A gene for the lysin of Lactococcus lactis bacteriphage phi vML3 was cloned using an Escherichia coli/bacteriophage lambda host-vector system. The gene was detected by its expression of antimicrobial activity against L. lactis cells in a bioassay. The cloned fragment was analysed by sub-cloning on to E. coli plasmid vectors and by restriction endonuclease and deletion mapping. Its entire DNA sequence was determined and an open reading frame for the lysin structural gene was identified. The sequenced lysin gene would express a protein of 187 amino acids with a molecular weight of 21,090, which is in good agreement with that of a protein detected after in vitro transcription and translation of DNA encoding the gene. Expression of the lysin gene in E. coli and B. subtilis from an adjacent bacteriophage promoter was readily detected but in L. lactis expression of lysin was found to be lethal. The bacteriophage phi vML3 lysin had sequence homology with protein 15 of B. subtilis bacteriophage PZA. This protein is involved in DNA packaging during bacteriophage maturation rather than in host cell lysis. The cloning and analysis of the phi vML3 lysin gene is of importance in further understanding lactic streptococcal bacteriophages, for the development of positive selection vectors and for biotechnological applications of relevance to the dairy industry.    We describe a general strategy for the identification of genes that are controlled by a specific regulatory factor in vivo and the use of this strategy to identify genes in Bacillus subtilis that are controlled by spo0H, a regulatory gene required for the initiation of sporulation. The general strategy makes use of a cloned regulatory gene fused to an inducible promoter to control expression of the regulatory gene and random gene fusions to a reporter gene to monitor expression in the presence and absence of the regulatory gene product. spo0H encodes a sigma factor of RNA polymerase, sigma H, and is required for the extensive reprograming of gene expression during the transition from growth to stationary phase and during the initiation of sporulation. We identified 18 genes that are controlled by sigma H (csh genes) in vivo by monitoring expression of random gene fusions to lacZ, made by insertion mutagenesis with the transposon Tn917lac, in the presence and absence of sigma H. These genes had lower levels of expression in the absence of sigma H than in the presence of sigma H. Patterns of expression of the csh genes during growth and sporulation in wild-type and spo0H mutant cells indicated that other regulatory factors are probably involved in controlling expression of some of these genes. Three of the csh::Tn917lac insertion mutations caused noticeable phenotypes. One caused a defect in vegetative growth, but only in combination with a spo0H mutation. Two others caused a partial defect in sporulation. One of these also caused a defect in the development of genetic competence.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    Bicarbonate is required for production of the major virulence factors, the toxins and capsule, of Bacillus anthracis. In this study we examined the basis for stimulation of production of protective antigen (PA), a central component of the two anthrax toxins encoded by plasmid pXO1. RNA prepared from B. anthracis grown in media with and without added bicarbonate was probed for PA mRNA. Data showed that bicarbonate was required for increased transcription of the PA gene (pag) in minimal medium. Transcription of pag was low in rich medium and could not be stimulated by the addition of bicarbonate. To characterize further the factors required for transcriptional regulation of pag, the promoter region of pag was fused to the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene (cat-86) of vector pPL703 and transformed by electroporation into pXO1+ (Tox+) and pXO1- (Tox-) strains of B. anthracis. Analysis of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase produced by the pag-cat-86 fusion in each of these backgrounds confirmed the results obtained by hybridization. Data obtained with this fusion also revealed that the large toxin plasmid, pXO1, found in virulent strains of B. anthracis, was required for stimulation of transcription of pag by bicarbonate. This result suggests the existence of a trans-acting factor that is involved in the activation of pag transcription.    Labelled cDNA transcribed in vitro from early-sporulation RNA was enriched for sporulation-specific sequences by subtractive hybridization to an excess of vegetative RNA and used to probe libraries of Bacillus subtilis chromosomal DNA. From the initial collection of clones that coded for RNAs transcribed preferentially during sporulation, several were subcloned and studied in more detail. It was found that two clones contained sequences (dciA and dciB) that had an undetectable level of transcription during vegetative growth but had transcripts that started to appear no later than eight minutes after induction of sporulation. A third DNA segment (dciC) was expressed at a low level in vegetative cells and increased within four minutes after induction of sporulation. The effects of spoO mutations, i.e. mutations that prevent cells from reaching stage I of the sporulation process, were tested. Induction of the dciA and dciB transcripts was significantly reduced in strains carrying mutations in the spoOA and spoOH genes but not in a spoOB mutant strain. In addition, a product of the abrB locus, a locus in which mutations are known to partially overcome the pleiotropic effect of spoOA and spoOB mutations, seemed to be required for dciA and dciB expression.    The expression of the Bacillus subtilis phage phi 29 DNA is controlled by the viral gene 4 product, which is required for the initiation of transcription at the unique late promoter A3. Protein p4 binds specifically to a phi 29 DNA fragment containing the A3 promoter. DNase I footprinting analysis has shown that the DNA binding region for protein p4 is located between nucleotides -50 and -100 relative to the transcription start site. Methylation interference assays suggest that two eight base-pair long inverted repeats located within this binding region are the protein p4 recognition sequence. These results, together with the fact that the protein p4-dependent in vitro transcription requires the B. subtilis sigma 43-RNA polymerase, indicate that protein p4 is a transcriptional activator. The protein p4 DNA recognition region is statically bent as suggested by gel retardation and chemical cleavage assays. A model of protein p4 binding to its DNA target site is proposed.    Cytochrome P-450BM-3 (P-450BM-3) from Bacillus megaterium incorporates both a P-450 and an NADPH:P-450 reductase in proteolytically separable domains of a single, 119-kDa polypeptide and functions as a fatty acid monooxygenase independently of any other protein. A 5-kilobase DNA fragment which contains the gene encoding P-450BM-3 was sequenced. A single continuous open reading frame starting at nucleotide 1541 of the 5-kilobase fragment correctly predicted the previously determined NH2-terminal protein sequences of the trypsin-generated P-450 and reductase domains and, in toto, predicted a mature polypeptide of 1,048-amino acid residues with Mr = 117,641. The trypsin site was found at arginine residue 471. The P-450 domain is most similar (about 25%) to the fatty acid omega-hydroxylases of P-450 family IV, while the reductase domain exhibits some 33% sequence similarity with the NADPH:P-450 reductases of mammalian liver. Both the P-450 and reductase domains of P-450BM-3 define new gene families but contain highly conserved segments which display as much as 50% sequence similarity with P-450s and reductases of eukaryotic origin. The mRNA for P-450BM-3 was found by S1 mapping to be 3,339 +/- 10 nucleotides in length. In the accompanying paper, two regions in the 1.5 kilobases 5&apos; to the P-450BM-3 coding region have been implicated in the regulation of P-450BM-3 gene expression.    In a previous publication (Wen, L.-P., and Fulco, A. J. (1987) J. Biol. Chem. 262, 6676-6682), we described the cloning of the gene encoding cytochrome P-450BM-3, a catalytically self-sufficient fatty acid monooxygenase induced by barbiturates in Bacillus megaterium. We have now subcloned a 1.6-kilobase segment of DNA from this cloned gene that includes the barbiturate-responsive regulatory region as well as 88 bases encoding the NH2-terminal portion of cytochrome P-450BM-3. From this, we generated two series of 5&apos; and 3&apos; deletion derivatives and examined their effects on gene expression. When the 1.6-kilobase fragment or the 1.3-kilobase 5&apos;----3&apos; deletion derivative is inserted into Escherichia coli on a vector containing a promoterless chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) gene with the sequence encoding the NH2-terminal portion of P-450BM-3 placed immediately in front of the CAT gene, CAT activity is constitutive and unaffected by pentobarbital. On the other hand, the basal level of CAT is low in B. megaterium transformed by the same construct but is strongly inducible by pentobarbital. Furthermore, the multicopy plasmid containing this regulatory region causes a dramatic decrease in both the basal and pentobarbital-induced expression of chromosomally encoded P-450BM-3 in B. megaterium. This competition effect, unlike CAT expression, is independent of the orientation of the regulatory DNA segment in the plasmid. Removal of 0.3 kilobase or more from the 3&apos; end of the 1.6-kilobase segment of DNA or 0.6 kilobase from the 5&apos; end abolishes the competition effect and also eliminates basal and inducible CAT expression in B. megaterium. In transformed E. coli, constitutive CAT expression is maintained when as little as 0.3 kilobase of DNA from the 3&apos; end of the 1.6-kilobase segment is inserted in the correct orientation in front of the CAT gene. The data are consistent with the hypothesis that the synthesis of cytochrome P-450BM-3 in B. megaterium is under positive control and requires gene interaction with at least one trans-acting factor, presumably a protein, to activate transcription from the P-450BM-3 promoter. The binding of this putative protein is mediated by at least two regulatory regions (R1 and R2) that span about 1 kilobase of the 5&apos;-flanking region of the gene.    The 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex consists of three different subenzymes, the E1o (2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase) component, the E2o (dihydrolipoyl transsuccinylase) component, and the E3 (dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase) component. In Bacillus subtilis, the E1o and E2o subenzymes are encoded by odhA and odhB, respectively. A plasmid with a 6.8-kilobase-pair DNA fragment containing odhA and odhB was isolated. Functional E1o and E2o are expressed from this plasmid in Escherichia coli. Antisera generated against B. subtilis E1o and E2o expressed in E. coli reacted with antigens of the same size from B. subtilis. The nucleotide sequence of odhB and the terminal part of odhA was determined. The deduced primary sequence of B. subtilis E2o shows striking similarity to the corresponding E. coli protein, which made it possible to identify the lipoyl-binding lysine residue as well as catalytic histidine and aspartic acid residues. An mRNA of 4.5 kilobases hybridizing to both odhA and odhB probes was detected, indicating that odhA and odhB form an operon.    The amyR2 allele of the Bacillus subtilis alpha-amylase cis-regulatory region enhances production of amylase and transcription of amyE, the structural gene, by two- to threefold over amyR1. The amylase gene bearing each of these alleles was cloned on plasmids of about 10 to 15 copies per chromosome. Transcription of the cloned amylase gene by each amyR allele was activated at the end of exponential growth and was subject to catabolite repression by glucose. The amount of amylase produced was roughly proportional to the copy number of the plasmid, and cells containing the amyR2-bearing plasmid, pAR2, produced two- to threefold more amylase than cells with the amyR1 plasmid, pAMY10. Deletion of DNA 5&apos; to the alpha-amylase promoter, including deletion of the A + T-rich inverted repeat found in amyR1 and amyR2, had no effect on expression or transcription of alpha-amylase. Deletion of DNA 3&apos; to the amyR1 promoter did not impair temporal activation of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase in amyR1-cat-86 transcriptional fusions, but catabolite repression was abolished. When an 8-base-pair linker was inserted in pAMY10 at the same site from which the 3&apos; deletion was made, amylase expression doubled and was repressed less by glucose. Both the deletion and the insertion disrupted four bases at the 3&apos; end of the putative amylase operator region. Site-directed mutagenesis was used to change bases in the promoter-operator region of amyR1 to their amyR2 counterparts. Either change alone increased amylase production twofold, but only the change at +7, next to the linker insertion of 3&apos; deletion site, yielded the increased amylase activity in the presence of glucose that is characteristic of the amyR2 strain. The double mutant behaved most like strains carrying the amyR2 allele.    Ribonuclease P (RNase P) RNA is the catalytic moiety of the ribonucleoprotein enzyme that removes precursor sequences from the 5&apos; ends of pre-transfer RNAs in eubacteria. Phylogenetic variation according to recently proposed secondary structure models was used to identify structural elements of the RNase P RNA that are dispensable for catalysis. A simplified RNase P RNA that consists only of evolutionarily conserved features was designed, synthesized, and characterized. Although the simplified RNA (Min 1 RNA) is only 263 nucleotides in length, in contrast to the 354 to 417 nucleotides of naturally occurring RNase P RNAs, its specificity of pre-tRNA cleavage is identical to that of the native enzymes. Moreover, the catalytic efficiencies of the Min 1 RNA and the native RNA enzymes are similar. These results focus the search for the catalytic elements of RNase P RNAs to their conserved structure.    The Alu156 promoter isolated from the Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage SP82 is dependent on curved DNA upstream of the -35 region for efficient function. Short DNA insertions of 6-29 base pairs were used to simultaneously change the linear placement and rotational orientation of this curved DNA relative to the -35 region. When these mutant promoters were analyzed in vivo using transcriptional fusions with a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene, changes in the rotational orientation of the curved DNA correlated with changes in promoter function. The most efficient mutant promoters contained insertions of 11 and 21 base pairs, and insertions of 15 and 25 base pairs resulted in the least efficient mutant promoters. The importance of the proper rotational alignment of the curved DNA to promoter activity was also observed in vitro at the level of transcription of RNA polymerase binding. Based on the electrophoretic mobilities of DNA fragments containing the various insertion mutant promoters, there was a second region of curved DNA downstream of the insertion point. The findings are consistent with the idea that the curved DNA deflects the helix back toward the promoter-bound RNA polymerase molecule to allow the enzyme to interact directly with upstream DNA. These interactions are proposed to structure the DNA for the formation of the open promoter complex.    A classification for crystal protein genes of Bacillus thuringiensis is presented. Criteria used are the insecticidal spectra and the amino acid sequences of the encoded proteins. Fourteen genes are distinguished, encoding proteins active against either Lepidoptera (cryI), Lepidoptera and Diptera (cryII), Coleoptera (cryIII), or Diptera (cryIV). One gene, cytA, encodes a general cytolytic protein and shows no structural similarities with the other genes. Toxicity studies with single purified proteins demonstrated that every described crystal protein is characterized by a highly specific, and sometimes very restricted, insect host spectrum. Comparison of the deduced amino acid sequences reveals sequence elements which are conserved for Cry proteins. The expression of crystal protein genes is affected by a number of factors. Recently, two distinct sigma subunits regulating transcription during different stages of sporulation have been identified, as well as a protein regulating the expression of a crystal protein at a posttranslational level. Studies on the biochemical mechanisms of toxicity suggest that B. thuringiensis crystal proteins induce the formation of pores in membranes of susceptible cells. In vitro binding studies with radiolabeled toxins demonstrated a strong correlation between the specificity of B. thuringiensis toxins and the interaction with specific binding sites on the insect midgut epithelium. The expression of B. thuringiensis crystal proteins in plant-associated microorganisms and in transgenic plants has been reported. These approaches are potentially powerful strategies for the protection of agriculturally important crops against insect damage.    Flagellar and chemotaxis genes are transcribed at a discrete time in the Caulobacter cell cycle. We demonstrate here that the expression of the Escherichia coli chemoreceptor gene tsr, with 2.6 kilobases of its upstream sequence, is temporally controlled in Caulobacter crescentus. The tsr gene was placed on the chromosome in single copy or on a low-copy-number plasmid. It was found that the Tsr protein appeared at the same point in the cell cycle as an endogenous C. crescentus methyl-accepting chemotaxis protein. Nuclease S1 mapping experiments showed that the tsr transcript was also controlled by the cell cycle, suggesting that the E. coli tsr gene is regulated by C. crescentus factors that mediate the timing of transcription initiation. The apparent transcription start site of the E. coli tsr gene was determined in both E. coli and C. crescentus, and we found that in both backgrounds the promoter used conforms to the consensus sequence for the promoters of the flagellar and chemosensory genes of Bacillus subtilis and E. coli. The use of this promoter suggests that C. crescentus has a cognate sigma factor and predicts that other C. crescentus genes are expressed from this consensus promoter.    The Bacillus subtilis gene hag, which codes for the flagellin structural protein, was identified by DNA sequence analysis in a collection of DNA fragments bearing in vitro promoters for the sigma 28 form of RNA polymerase. The hag gene and adjacent regions of the B. subtilis chromosome were restriction mapped, and the nucleotide sequence was determined. The hag gene was transcribed at all stages of growth from a single promoter that had sequences in the promoter recognition region characteristic of the consensus sequence for the sigma 28 holoenzyme. Transcription of hag was eliminated by insertion mutations that blocked synthesis of the sigma 28 protein. These findings provide strong support for the previous proposal that the sigma 28 form of RNA polymerase controls transcription of a regulon specifying flagellar, chemotaxis, and motility functions in B. subtilis (J. D. Helmann and M. J. Chamberlin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 84:6422-6424, 1987). The steady-state levels of hag mRNA increased during exponential growth and peaked as the B. subtilis cells entered the stationary phase. The transcript levels then decreased to zero within 4 h after the onset of sporulation. Hence, sigma 28 RNA polymerase function is temporally regulated.    A plasmid vector has been constructed that permits the positive selection of Bacillus subtilis transcriptional terminator signals. The usage of the vector and its possible applications to the analysis of gene regulation in B. subtilis are described.    Expression of the Bacillus licheniformis alpha-amylase gene, amyL, was temporally activated and subject to catabolite repression both in its natural host and when cloned on a 3.55-kilobase fragment in Bacillus subtilis. A subclone from which the promoter region of amyL and sequences upstream from the promoter were deleted had a low level of amylase activity. Expression of the promoterless gene was still subject to repression by glucose when the gene was present either on a multicopy plasmid or integrated into the B. subtilis chromosome. Catabolite repression occurred independently of the amylase promoter and irrespective of the distance of the promoterless amyL gene from the promoter which transcribed it. The transcriptional start sites of amyL activated by its own promoter and by a vector sequence promoter were determined by S1 mapping. alpha-Amylase-specific mRNA levels were measured in repressing and nonrepressing media, and catabolite repression was found to act at the level of transcription.    The expression of the spo0A-lacZ fusion gene was partially repressed in the presence of an excess of glucose. Expression was restored either by the mutation sigA47(crsA47) or by addition of decoyinine, an inhibitor of GMP synthetase, to the medium. By constructing a lacZ fusion with a smaller fragment of the spo)A gene, we observed a beta-galactosidase profile in which expression was completely repressed by an excess of glucose. This expression was restored by the addition of decoyinine. These results indicate that the expression of the spo0A gene is regulated by at least two different mechanisms, one sensitive to glucose, the other not. Furthermore, the glucose-sensitive regulation was shown to reside at the transcriptional level. It is likely that the reduced expression of the spo0A gene in the presence of glucose at an early stage of sporulation causes the repression of sporulation.    Plasmid deletion formation was compared in wild-type, recE4, and addB72 strains of Bacillus subtilis. Deletion frequencies in plasmid pGP1, as monitored with a penP-lacZ fusion, were low in recE4 and high in addB72, in comparison to the wild-type strain. In the wild-type and recE4 strains, deletions between directly repeated sequences were rare. In contrast, about half of the deletions in the addB72 mutant resulted from recombination at direct repeats of 5 bp or more. The sequences at or near the left deletion endpoints showed striking similarities in the three strains. (1) 5&apos;-T-T-T-3&apos;, or the complement 5&apos;-A-A-A-3&apos;, was frequently located at these sites. (2) 5&apos;-T-G-T-A-3&apos; was found close to most of these termini. (3) Nearly all left termini occurred in a region rich in hyphenated dyad symmetry, which includes the penP transcription/translation regulatory sequences. It is assumed that DNA secondary structures, together with a sequence preference, specify the majority of the left deletion termini, which we speculate to be target sites for topoisomerase I. The right termini of deletions in the wild-type and addB72 mutant were frequently located close to a loose octanucleotide consensus sequence: 5&apos;-G/C-G/C-G/C-G-A/T-A/T-A/T-A/G-3&apos;. In contrast, in the recE4 mutant, the sequence 5&apos;-C-A-G/C-G/C-G/C-G/C-T/G-3&apos; was more frequently found at this position.    The product of the abrB gene of Bacillus subtilis is an ambiactive repressor and activator of the transcription of genes expressed during the transition state between vegetative growth and the onset of stationary phase and sporulation. Purified AbrB protein binds specifically in a highly co-operative fashion to fragments of DNA containing the promoters it affects. DNase I footprints of the binding regions in these promoters revealed large protected areas of 50-120 nucleotides or more depending on the promoter. Methylation protection experiments gave protected guanine residues on only one face of the DNA helix. A consensus sequence could be deduced around these guanine residues that was not found around non-protected guanine residues in the footprint region. The results suggested that stationary phase functions and sporulation are repressed during active growth by AbrB and other transition state regulators by binding to the affected promoters in a concentration-dependent manner.    In vitro studies demonstrated that the Bacillus subtilis subtilisin gene (aprE) could be transcribed by RNA polymerase holoenzyme reconstituted from core and sigma A factor obtained from vegetative cells. Upstream deletions (from -45) reduced the amount of transcription from the promoter. A deletion downstream of the promoter that overlapped a putative downstream minor promoter did not affect transcription from the sigma A promoter, which indicated that the putative downstream promoter is not utilized in vivo. S1 nuclease mapping studies showed that there was a low level of transcription from the subtilisin promoter during the growth phase and that the site of transcription initiation was the same during log and stationary phases. We conclude from these findings that there is only one promoter for the subtilisin gene and that it can be transcribed by the sigma A form of RNA polymerase in vitro.    Nutrient conditions which trigger sporulation also activate expression of the Bacillus licheniformis alpha-amylase gene, amyL. Glucose represses both spore formation and expression of amyL. A fusion was constructed between the B. licheniformis alpha-amylase regulatory and 5&apos; upstream sequences (amyRi) and the Escherichia coli lacZ structural gene to identify sequences involved in mediating temporal activation and catabolite repression of the amyL gene in Bacillus subtilis. amyRi-directed expression in a variety of genetic backgrounds and under different growth conditions was investigated. A 108-base-pair sequence containing an inverted repeat sequence, ribosome-binding site, and 26 codons of the structural gene was sufficient to mediate catabolite repression of amyL. spo0 mutations (spo0A, spo0B, spo0E, and spo0H) had no significant effect on temporal activation of the gene fusion when the recipient strains were grown in nonrepressing medium. However, in glucose-grown cultures the presence of a spo0A mutation resulted in more severe repression of amyRi-lacZ. In contrast, a spo0H mutation reduced the repressive effect of glucose on amyRi-lacZ expression. The spo0A effect was relieved by an abrB mutation. Initiation of sporulation is not a prerequisite for either temporal activation or derepression of alpha-amylase synthesis. Mutations causing resistance to catabolite repression in B. subtilis GLU-47, SF33, WLN30, and WLN104 also relieved catabolite repression of amyRi-lacZ.    In Escherichia coli, the workhorse of molecular biology, a single operon is involved in the replication, transcription and translation of genetic information. This operon is controlled in a complex manner involving multiple cis-acting regulatory sequences and trans-acting regulatory proteins. It interacts with global regulatory networks by mechanisms which are presently being dissected.    During sporulation in Bacillus subtilis, expression of the genes sspA, sspB, sspC, sspD, and sspE, which encode a family of small, acid-soluble spore proteins, as well as of the spoVA and gdh operons is transcriptionally activated at stage III of sporulation only in the forespore compartment. Transcription of these genes is mediated by RNA polymerase containing sigma G (E sigma G), the product of the sigG gene, which is itself expressed at stage III in the developing forespore. We have determined the 5&apos; ends of transcripts generated both in vivo and in vitro by the action of E sigma G on various genes of B. subtilis and other bacilli. The 5&apos; ends of the in vivo and in vitro mRNAs were found to coincide and were therefore considered to define the transcription initiation sites for the genes examined. We identified highly homologous DNA sequences centered at 35 and 10 base pairs preceding the transcriptional start sites of the genes examined. Consequently, we propose that these sequences define a class of promoters recognized only by E sigma G which allow transcription of genes expressed uniquely at stage III in the developing forespore.    We describe a mutation that changes the fine specificity of promoter selection by a secondary form of RNA polymerase holoenzyme in Bacillus subtilis. The product of regulatory gene spo0H is an RNA polymerase sigma factor called sigma H, which directs transcription of a sporulation gene known as spoVG. We show that the spo0H mutation spo0H81, which blocks transcription from the wild-type spoVG promoter, enhances transcription from a mutant form of the spoVG promoter (spoVG249) bearing a severe down-mutation (a G.C to A.T transition) at position -13 in the &quot;-10 region.&quot; Suppression of the spoVG249 mutation is specific in the sense that the transcription from several other spoVG mutant promoters was not restored by the mutant sigma. Evidently, spo0H81 is a change-of-specificity mutation that alters sigma H-RNA polymerase in a way that decreases its capacity to use the wild-type spoVG promoter, while increasing its capacity to use the mutant promoter. Transcription experiments in vitro using RNA polymerase containing the wild-type or mutant sigma support this interpretation. The spo0H81 mutation causes a threonine (Thr100) to isoleucine substitution in a region of sigma H that is highly homologous among sigma factors of diverse origins. We discuss the possibility that Thr100 is an amino acid-base-pair contact site and that sigma factors contact the -10 region of their cognate promoters by means of amino acid residues in this highly conserved region.    Plasmid pCIS7, containing 11.5 kilobases (kb) of Bacillus subtilis DNA, was isolated from a Tn917 transposon insertion in tetracycline-sensitive B. subtilis KS162. When integrated into the chromosome of B. subtilis 168, this plasmid conferred tetracycline resistance upon reiteration of the plasmid DNA sequences in the chromosome. Deletions and subclones of pCIS7 were constructed and introduced into an Escherichia coli in vitro transcription-translation system. A 72-kilodalton protein was localized to a 3.1-kb PstI-EcoRI fragment of the plasmid. Amplification of the 3.1-kb PstI-EcoRI fragment was required for expression of tetracycline resistance in B. subtilis 168. By hybridization to previously characterized clones, the 11.5-kb fragment was localized to the origin region of the chromosome. Through contour-clamped homogeneous electric field electrophoresis, this cluster of clones was shown to reside on a 200-kb NotI fragment bridging SfiI fragments of 150 and 250 kb and was oriented with respect to the purA and guaA loci, developing an accurate physical map of the region surrounding the origin of replication.    The spoIIA locus of Bacillus licheniformis was cloned into the phage vector phi 105J9; selection was based on the ability of the clone to complement mutations in both the first and the last of the spoIIA genes of B. subtilis. The B. licheniformis DNA was subcloned into M13 and sequenced; it includes three genes of identical lengths to those of B. subtilis. The average interspecies difference in nucleotide sequence is 24%; C occurs at the third position of codons 55% more often in the B. licheniformis than in the B. subtilis sequence. The average difference in predicted amino acid sequence is 11%, but the distribution of these differences is far from random, and there are several long stretches of amino acid sequence that are identical in the two organisms. The distribution of non-conservative amino acid changes between the species is also strikingly non-random; no such changes are found in those regions in which missense mutations are known in B. subtilis. Each species has an open reading frame 5&apos; of the spoIIAA gene, but the predicted amino acid sequence, and the distribution of differences between the two species in both nucleotides and predicted amino acids, suggest that these open reading frames are not expressed. Both species have regions 3&apos; of the open reading frames which resemble rho-independent terminators of transcription, but that in B. licheniformis is longer and could form a more elaborate secondary structure than that in B. subtilis.    Bacillus subtilis cells harvested 3.5 h after the onset of sporulation (t3.5) were fractionated into extracts enriched in either mother cell or forespore components and were analyzed immunologically for sigma E and its precursor protein, P31. We determined by Western blot (immunoblot) analysis that equivalent amounts of P31 and sigma E were present in both mother cell and forespore extracts. This result implies that, although sigma E is not synthesized until a stage in development when the cell is partitioned into progenitor forespore and mother cell compartments, it probably directs the transcription of genes that are expressed in both of these structures.    The Bacillus subtilis pur operon is a 12-gene cluster, purEKB-purC(orf)QLF-purMNH(J)-purD, organized in groups of overlapping coding units separated by intercistronic gaps. Translational fusions of Escherichia coli lacZ were constructed to purE, purC, and purM, the first gene of each group. Analyses of gene fusions integrated into the chromosomal pur operon exclude the possibility of internal promoters in intercistronic regions and support the view that transcription is from the single sigma 43 promoter at the 5&apos; end of the operon. Enzyme and mRNA measurements indicate that transcriptional regulation occurs solely at the 5&apos; end of the operon. The relative levels of beta-galactosidase from purE-lacZ, purC-lacZ, and purM-lacZ were determined under repressing and nonrepressing conditions. These results indicate that expression of purC-lacZ was 3.0- to 6.8-fold higher than purE-lacZ because of enhanced translational efficiency. The enhanced translational efficiency of purC-lacZ was accompanied by a partial escape from regulation by purines. This anomalous effect on purC-lacZ was the only suggestion for posttranscriptional regulation.    The amount of succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) in Bacillus subtilis varies with growth conditions. In this work we studied the steady-state level and the rate of decay of B. subtilis sdh mRNA under different growth conditions. In exponentially growing cells, the steady-state level of sdh mRNA was severalfold lower when glucose was present compared with growth without glucose, whereas the rate of decay of sdh mRNA was the same with and without glucose. Thus, glucose repression seems to act by decreasing sdh mRNA synthesis. When the bacteria entered the stationary phase, the steady-state level of sdh mRNA dropped about sixfold. At the same time, sdh mRNA half-life decreased from 2.6 to 0.4 min. This result indicates that transcription of the sdh operon is initiated at the same rate in exponentially growing and in stationary-phase cells. The start point of the sdh transcripts, as measured by primer extension, was the same under all conditions studied, suggesting that the sdh operon is solely controlled by the previously identified sigma 43-like promoter. The increase of SDH activity in stationary phase may be explained by reduced dilution of the SDH proteins as a result of the retarded growth rate. We suggest that enhanced degradation of the sdh transcript is a means by which the bacteria adjust expression to the demands of stationary phase.    Levanase expression in Bacillus subtilis was studied by using transcriptional and translational fusions. It was shown that the degradative products of levan or inulin and low concentrations of fructose were able to induce levanase expression. In the wild-type strain and in a constitutive overproducing sacL mutant, levanase synthesis was repressed by glucose or fructose. This catabolite repression was partially abolished in the derepressed alpha-amylase gra-26 mutant. The levanase gene (sacC) appears to be the distal gene of an operon transcribed from a fructose-inducible promoter. Deletion mapping experiments and primer extension analysis revealed a transcriptional start point located 2.7 kilobases upstream from the sacC gene. Two constitutive sacL mutations were shown to be closely linked by transformation to the sacC gene. The sacL6 and sacL8 mutations were mapped in the promoter-proximal region of the operon.    BlaI repressor for the beta-lactamase gene (blaP) of Bacillus licheniformis 749, was shown to repress expression of blaP and of the repressor gene (blaI), using the purified protein in a DNA-directed in vitro translation assay. Binding of BlaI to the promoter regions of blaP and blaI was examined by equilibrium and competitive binding assays. BlaI binds to the blaP promoter with an equal or only slightly higher affinity than to the blaI promoter. DNase I footprinting shows that BlaI binds directly to the blaP and blaI promoters, such that RNA polymerase binding and/or transcript elongation would be blocked.    Expression of the Bacillus subtilis gluconate (gnt) operon is negatively regulated by the gnt repressor which is antagonized by D-gluconate or D-glucono-delta-lactone. The repressor specifically binds to a gnt operator near the gnt promoter. From the results of gel retardation assaying of the gnt repressor and various restriction enzyme digests of a fragment carrying the gnt promoter and the gntR gene, the gnt operator was found to be located within a 141-base pair region containing the gnt promoter. Deoxyribonuclease I protection experiments revealed that the gnt repressor protected a gnt promoter region, between -10 and +15, which contains a region showing dyad symmetry with a sequence showing half-symmetry, ATACTTGTA. A 35-base pair synthetic duplex DNA containing this region showing dyad symmetry specifically bound to the gnt repressor. Through cleavage at two AccI sites in the protected region an 8-base pair deletion was introduced into the region showing dyad symmetry, which made expression of the gnt promoter constitutive. A DNA fragment carrying this deletion did not bind to the repressor. These results clearly indicated that the gnt operator sequence is a sequence containing the region showing dyad symmetry located at the transcription initiation site of the gnt operon. It was also suggested that the gnt operon contains only one operator. The similarity in the recognition between the repressor-operator interaction of the gnt operon and those of Escherichia coli TrpR and its operators was discussed.    A gene for Streptomyces subtilisin inhibitor (SSI) from Streptomyces albogriseolus S-3253 was cloned into E. coli plasmid pBR322 using two oligodeoxyribonucleotides corresponding to Asp68 to Pro77 and Asn99 to Gly107 of the protein, respectively. The SSI gene was localized on a 1.8-kbp BglII/SalI fragment. The nucleotide sequence of this 1.8-kbp fragment was determined by the dideoxy sequencing method. The amino acid sequence of the mature SSI coding region derived from the nucleotide sequence determination corresponded exactly to that from protein sequencing analysis. The nucleotide sequence analysis showed the presence of a putative signal peptide comprising 31 amino acids preceding the mature SSI region. The major transcriptional start point was identified to be 60 nucleotides upstream from the putative initiation codon for translation by the primer extension method. The -45 to -25 region upstream from transcriptional start point was quite homologous to that of CTC promoter of Bacillus subtilis. The overall G + C content of this 1.8-kbp fragment was 72%. On the other hand, an extremely high G + C content (96%) was found at the third letter of codons in the SSI coding region.    Two genes coding for xylanase synthesis in Bacillus circulans were cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli. After digestion of genomic DNA from Bacillus circulans with EcoRI and PstI, the fragments were ligated into the corresponding sites of pUC19 and transformed into Escherichia coli. Restriction enzyme mapping of the two inserts coding for xylanase activity indicated distinctly different nucleotide sequences. Cross-hybridization assays confirmed the absence of sequence homology between the two genes. In vitro transcription-translation assays indicated that the cloned genes encoded for proteins with molecular weights of 22,000 and 59,000. The gene products displayed different substrate specificities. The 22,000-dalton enzyme readily hybrolyzed aspeen, larchwood, and oat spelt xylans, whereas the second was unable to extensively depolymerize oat spelt xylan and resulted in very limited reducing sugar release from any of the xylan substrates tested. Both of the xylanases had isoelectric points of approximately 9.0.    The gene for an unusual 8kD Bacillus subtilis spore coat polypeptide has been cloned and sequenced. It contains high percentages of proline, glycine and tyrosine, lacks thirteen amino acids, and is present as the carboxyl two-thirds of an open reading frame encoding a 12kD polypeptide. Two presumptive precursors which could be converted to the 8kD antigen by incubation with trypsin were found in extracts of cells or spores of a strain containing multiple copies of this gene. Large amounts of these coat antigens were also present in extracts of a germination-defective mutant which is altered in spore coat structure. There was little 8kD coat protein in the mutant, however, implying that processing is dependent on proper coat assembly. This gene was mapped to the metA region of the B. subtilis chromosome, a unique location as is true for other spore coat genes. Transcription and translation occurred late in sporulation (stage V) and the upstream region contained sequences similar to those found in other spore coat genes.    The Clostridium perfringens alpha-toxin (phospholipase C) gene (cpa) has been cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli. The biological activities of the cloned gene product have been analysed and the complete nucleotide sequence of the cpa gene has been determined. The cloned cpa gene product, which is exported to the periplasm in E. coli, possesses both phospholipase C and haemolytic activities. Haemolysis is not apparent when cell extracts are incubated with isotonic suspensions of sheep erythrocytes, but can be detected and quantified readily when dilutions of the same extracts are placed in wells in sheep-blood agar plates. Like other sequenced clostridial genes, the cpa gene has a high AT content (66.4%), exhibits a strong bias for using codons with A or T in the wobble position, and the 350 base pairs upstream from the gene have a significantly higher AT content (79.5%) than the coding region. The cpa gene encodes a 398 amino acid polypeptide with a deduced molecular weight of 45,481 D. This is very similar to the estimated molecular weight (Mr) of the cpa primary gene product expressed in an in vitro transcription-translation system (Mr 46,000), but larger than the cpa gene product detected in E. coli minicells, E. coli whole cells or in C. perfringens cells (Mr 43,000), suggesting post-translational processing. The 28 N-terminal residues of the deduced alpha-toxin sequence possess the consensus features of a signal peptide and may be removed during secretion. The deduced alpha-toxin sequence shares significant structural homology with the phosphatidylcholine-preferring phospholipase C of Bacillus cereus.    The gluconate (gnt) operon contains genes for a repressor of the operon, gluconate kinase, and gluconate permease. A nonleaky kinase mutation (gntK4) induced the gnt operon constitutively through interaction of the repressor with an inducer of gluconate which had been endogenously formed and accumulated in the cell owing to the complete deficiency of the kinase even in the absence of gluconate in the medium. In contrast, a nonleaky permease mutation (gntP9) never induced the operon by gluconate likely because it cannot give rise to its inducing concentration in the cell even in the presence of gluconate in the medium.    Transcription of the spo0B gene and genes downstream of it was investigated by S1 nuclease protection experiments. The spo0B gene was transcribed from a single promoter, and this transcript extended through a gene, obg, coding for a 47,668 Mr protein. Transcription of this operon ended in a stem-loop structure. The sequence of the deduced obg protein contained a region with homology to known GTP-binding proteins in the nucleotide-binding regions. The amino-terminal portion of this protein showed homology to mammalian collagen, suggesting a structural role. The purified obg protein was shown to bind [alpha-32P]GTP in vitro. Several attempts to inactivate the obg gene were unsuccessful, indicating that the obg gene product was essential for growth. The possible function of this protein and its relationship to RAS-like proteins and sporulation was discussed. Immediately downstream of the obg gene were two genes involved in phenylalanine biosynthesis, pheB and pheA. The pheA gene coded for monofunctional prephenate dehydratase, on the basis of the high homology of the deduced amino acid sequence to prephenate dehydratases of bacterial origin. The sequence of the pheB gene product was not homologous to chorismate mutase, and its function remains unknown. Transcription of the phe genes was shown to begin at the stem-loop structure between obg and pheB. The possibility was entertained that phe gene transcription arises from processing or antitermination of the spo0B transcript.    Transcription of the Bacillus subtilis pur operon is regulated independently by adenine and guanine levels in the growth medium. Transcription initiation is regulated by adenine, transcription attenuation by guanine (Ebbole, D. J., and Zalkin, H. (1987) J. Biol. Chem. 262, 8274-8287). A purC-lacZ fusion was constructed to monitor gene expression. Expression was reduced 11- and 18-fold by excess adenine and guanine, respectively. We have characterized the mechanism for the adenine-mediated control of transcription initiation. Deletions of DNA between nucleotides -193 and -37, relative to the start of transcription, resulted in high level constitutive expression and thus identified a control site for negative regulation. A candidate for a pur operon repressor protein was identified in a cell extract and was partially purified. This protein interacts specifically with an extended 5&apos; flanking region of the pur operon that includes the control site identified by deletion analysis. DNase I footprinting defined the region of DNA-protein interaction between nucleotides -145 and -29. The protein-DNA interaction was not dependent on adenine, adenosine, or adenine nucleotides in vitro. These results suggest that a complex interaction of protein with an extended control region may repress transcription by blocking the -35 promoter site. This protein-DNA interaction is unlike that which regulates pur gene expression in Escherichia coli.    The nucleotide sequence of a CmR determinant, located on the Clostridium perfringens plasmid pIP401, was determined and its gene product was identified as chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT). The cat structural gene is preceded by transcription-initiation signals characteristic for Escherichia coli sigma 70 or Bacillus subtilis sigma 43 promoters. By promoter probing in the heterologous hosts the direction of transcription of the clostridial cat gene was analysed and the cat mRNA start point was determined in vitro using the RNA polymerases of E. coli and B. subtilis. Comparison of the amino acid sequences of C. perfringens CAT and other CAT proteins of Gram-positive and Gram-negative origin shows a remarkable degree of homology between the various enzymes.    The gene encoding glucose dehydrogenase (gdh) is part of an operon whose expression is transcriptionally activated specifically in the developing forespore of Bacillus subtilis at stage III of sporulation. The in vivo startpoint of gdh transcription was determined using primer extension analysis. Deletion mapping and site-specific mutagenesis experiments indicated that the region responsible for regulated expression of gdh in vivo was limited to the &quot;-35&quot; and &quot;-10&quot; regions preceding the transcriptional start site. RNA polymerase containing omega G (E omega G) transcribed gdh in vitro with a start site identical to that found in vivo, and transcription of gdh by E omega G in vitro also did not require any specific sequences upstream from &quot;-35&quot; region. These results suggest that the appearance of E omega G in the forespore at stage III of sporulation is sufficient to cause temporal and compartment-specific expression of the gdh operon.    Two genes encoding insecticidal crystal proteins from Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. kurstaki HD-1 were cloned and sequenced. Both genes, designated cryB1 and cryB2, encode polypeptides of 633 amino acids having a molecular mass of ca. 71 kilodaltons (kDa). Despite the fact that these two proteins display 87% identity in amino acid sequence, they exhibit different toxin specificities. The cryB1 gene product is toxic to both dipteran (Aedes aegypti) and lepidopteran (Manduca sexta) larvae, whereas the cryB2 gene product is toxic only to the latter. DNA sequence analysis indicates that cryB1 is the distal gene of an operon which is comprised of three open reading frames (designated orf1, orf2, and cryB1). The proteins encoded by cryB1 and orf2 are components of small cuboidal crystals found in several subspecies and strains of B. thuringiensis; it is not known whether the orf1 or cryB2 gene products are present in cuboidal crystals. The protein encoded by orf2 has an electrophoretic mobility corresponding to a molecular mass of ca. 50 kDa, although the gene has a coding capacity for a polypeptide of ca. 29 kDa. Examination of the deduced amino acid sequence for this protein reveals an unusual structure which may account for its aberrant electrophoretic mobility: it contains a 15-amino-acid motif repeated 11 times in tandem. Escherichia coli extracts prepared from cells expressing only orf1 and orf2 are not toxic to either test insect.    The genes specifying chemotaxis, motility, and flagellar function in Escherichia coli are coordinately regulated and form a large and complex regulon. Despite the importance of these genes in controlling bacterial behavior, little is known of the molecular mechanisms that regulate their expression. We have identified a minor form of E. coli RNA polymerase that specifically transcribes several E. coli chemotaxis/flagellar genes in vitro and is likely to carry out transcription of these genes in vivo. The enzyme was purified to near homogeneity based on its ability to initiate transcription of the E. coli tar chemotaxis gene at start sites that are used in vivo. Specific tar transcription activity is associated with a polypeptide of apparent 28-kDa molecular mass that remains bound to the E. coli RNA polymerase throughout purification. This peptide behaves as a secondary sigma factor--designated sigma F--because it restores specific tar transcription activity when added to core RNA polymerase. The sigma F holoenzyme also transcribes the E. coli tsr and flaAI genes in vitro as well as several Bacillus subtilis genes that are transcribed specifically by the sigma 28 form of B. subtilis RNA polymerase. The latter holoenzyme is implicated in transcription of flagellar and chemotaxis genes in B. subtilis. Hence E. coli sigma F holoenzyme appears to be analogous to the B. subtilis sigma 28 RNA polymerase, both in its promoter specificity and in the nature of the regulon it controls.    The gene for an extremely thermostable oligo-1,6-glucosidase (dextrin-6-alpha-D-glucanohydrolase; EC 3.2.1.10) of obligately thermophilic Bacillus thermoglucosidasius KP1006 was cloned within a 4.2-kilobase HindIII-PvuII fragment of DNA by using the plasmid pUC19 as a vector and Escherichia coli C600 as a host. The gene was transcribed, presumably from its own promoter, in E. coli. E. coli with the hybrid plasmid accumulated oligo-1,6-glucosidase mainly in the cytoplasm. The level of enzyme production was comparable to that observed for B. thermoglucosidasius. The enzyme coincided absolutely with the B. thermoglucosidasius enzyme in its molecular weight (60,000), in its electrophoretic behavior on denaturing and nondenaturing polyacrylamide gels, in the temperature dependency of its stability and activity, and in its antigenic determinants.    The entire coding region of the Bacillus thurigiensis HD73 crystal protein gene was subcloned from plasmid pJWK20 into the integration vector pUG2-15. This plasmid expresses chloramphenicol resistance when integrated into the Bacillus subtilis chromosome in the outH locus near the recE region. The correct molecular organization of the integrated plasmid was verified by hybridization to Southern blots of chromosomal DNA digests. Production of the toxic crystal protein was monitored at different time points during the life cycle of B. subtilis. Toxicity assays against Anagasta (Ephestia) larvae, direct electron microscopy crystal detection, and immunoblotting assays proved that the expression of the gene in B. subtilis is time regulated and restricted mainly to the sporulation stage. RNase protection experiments defined the transcription initiation start point and the transcription timing. All tests were made in a strain containing one to three copies of the integrated plasmid and in a strain subjected to an amplification regimen.    It has previously been shown that spollAC561, a mutation that diminishes the incidence of sporulation by more than six orders of magnitude, alters the residue at position 13 of the helix-turn-helix region of the sporulation-specific sigma factor encoded by spollAC from valine to methionine (Yudkin, 1987b). We have now found that four spontaneous revertants, which sporulate at an incidence of 30-60%, all contain transitions within the codon that was altered by spo-561. The mutant methionine is replaced by isoleucine in two revertants, and by threonine in the other two.    During sporulation, Bacillus subtilis undergoes successive morphological changes that can be arrested at various stages by mutations in many genes. One of these, spoIIGB, encodes a transcriptional factor, sigma E, which is necessary to proceed beyond stage II and to differentiate the cell in two compartments, the forespore and the mother cell. Mutations were introduced in an open reading frame located immediately downstream of spoIIGB. They block sporulation at stage III and define a new gene, spoIIIG, encoding a 260-amino-acid polypeptide highly similar to bacterial sigma-factors. A promoter was identified in the spoIIGB-spoIIIG interval by transcriptional fusion to lacZ. It is turned on 1 hr after the start of sigma E synthesis and is specifically activated in the forespore. The tandemly arranged spoIIGB and spoIIIG genes appear to encode homologous proteins that modulate transcription in a sequential fashion during sporulation.    During sporulation of Bacillus subtilis, two identical genomes segregate in two compartments, the forespore and mother cell. These genomes are expressed differentially, with some genes such as sspE turned on only in the forespore. In vitro transcription of sspE was obtained only with RNA polymerase extracted from sporulating cells. Fractionation of factors associated with this enzyme and reconstitution with core RNA polymerase from vegetative cells generated an enzyme accurately transcribing sspE in vitro and led to purification of a polypeptide with the amino-terminal sequence of the spoIIIG product. Inactivation of spoIIIG abolished expression of sspE and five other forespore-specific genes, whereas synthesis of the spoIIIG product in vegetative cells rapidly turned these genes on. Therefore, spoIIIG encodes a sigma-factor, sigma G, which controls the expression of multiple genes in the forespore compartment.    The start point of spoIIA transcription was defined by primer extension analysis with two separate primers. It was 27 bases upstream from the putative translation initiation codon of the first open reading frame in the spoIIA locus. A region extending at least 52 bases upstream from the transcription start site was necessary for transcription, as determined with integrative plasmids. Transcription of spoIIA was dependent on the spoOA, spoOB, and spoOF loci, but this dependency was partly overcome by increasing the number of copies of the spoIIA promoter region. Transcription of spoIIA was absolutely dependent on the spoOH locus, which codes for the RNA polymerase sigma factor sigma H. Regions approximately -35 and -10 upstream from the spoIIA transcription start site showed sequence homology with Bacillus subtilis sigma H promoters.    The 271 nucleotides long scRNA (small cytoplasmic RNA) from Bacillus subtilis is structurally related to the Escherichia coli 4.5 S RNA (114 nucleotides), an essential molecule supposed to be involved in protein biosynthesis, but it possesses an additional moiety completely missing in the E. coli 4.5 S RNA. Both RNAs share a conserved hairpin with the eukaryotic 7SL RNAs, which mediate protein translocation as part of the signal recognition particle (SRP). We have cloned and sequenced the entire scRNA gene region from B. subtilis and have studied transcription and processing of the scRNA in B. subtilis by nuclease S1 mapping. This analysis revealed the scRNA gene to constitute a monofunctional transcription unit, expressed from a single promoter to a rho-independent terminator, yielding a precursor which extends the mature scRNA by approximately 40 nucleotides at both ends. Processing of the scRNA apparently involves only two endonucleolytic cuts and occurs first at the 5&apos; end.    The complete nucleotide sequence of a 3541-base pairs (bp) DNA fragment from Bacillus stearothermophilus able to complement an Escherichia coli glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate-dehydrogenase (GAPDH) mutant (gapD-) has been determined. The B. stearothermophilus gap gene consists of a 1005-bp open reading frame commencing with an ATG start codon and ending with a TAA stop codon. Upstream from the start codon is a strong Shine-Dalgarno sequence typical of Gram-positive bacteria. Only one putative RNA polymerase recognition signal (-35 and -10 regions) is found 1153 bp upstream from the ATG start codon. In vivo utilization of this signal is in agreement with the study of gene expression from different subclones of the original fragment. 57 bp downstream from the TAA stop codon is a structure resembling Rho-independent transcription termination signals. Although B. stearothermophilus GAPDH-coding gene is highly expressed in E. coli, it contains several rare codons for E. coli. The predicted amino acid sequence of the GAPDH enzyme presents several differences with the amino acid sequence previously determined from the protein and is in better agreement with published crystallographic data.    Differential gene expression in the mother cell chamber of sporulating cells of Bacillus subtilis is determined in part by an RNA polymerase sigma factor called sigma K (or sigma 27). The sigma K factor was assigned as the product of the sporulation gene spoIVCB on the basis of the partial aminoterminal amino acid sequence of the purified protein. The spoIVCB gene is now shown to be a truncated gene capable of specifying only the amino terminal half of sigma K. The carboxyl terminal half is specified by another sporulation gene, spoIIIC, to which spoIVCB becomes joined inframe at an intermediate stage of sporulation by site-specific recombination within a 5-base pair repeated sequence. Juxtaposition of spoIVCB and spoIIIC need not be reversible in that the mother cell and its chromosome are discarded at the end of the developmental cycle. The rearrangement of chromosomal DNA could account for the presence of sigma K selectively in the mother cell and may be a precedent for the generation of cell type-specific regulatory proteins in other developmental systems where cells undergo terminal differentiation.    During sporulation in Bacillus subtilis, expression of developmental genes spoIVCB and cotD is induced in the mother cell compartment of the sporangium at morphological stages IV and V, respectively. A 27-kilodalton RNA polymerase sigma factor called sigma K (or sigma 27) has been found that causes weak transcription of spoIVCB and strong transcription of cotD. A 14-kD protein was also discovered that changes the specificity of sigma K-containing RNA polymerase, greatly stimulating spoIVCB transcription and markedly repressing cotD transcription. Both sigma K and the 14-kD protein are products of genes known to be required for expression of specific genes in the mother cell. Thus, sigma K directs gene expression in the mother cell and it is proposed that inactivation or sequestering of the 14-kD protein switches the temporal pattern of gene expression during the transition from stages IV to V of development.    We have cloned and sequenced the genes for the subunits of the proton-translocating ATP synthase of Bacillus megaterium QM B1551. The arrangement of the genes is identical to the arrangement of the same genes (the unc operon) in Escherichia coli. The genes for the Fo subunits immediately precede the genes for the F1 subunits and are themselves preceded by an open reading frame which codes for a protein similar to the E. coli i protein. In contrast to the E. coli ATPase genes, the transcript for these ATPase genes does not include this open reading frame.    The essential 4.5S RNA of Escherichia coli contains a structural motif, which is also present in RNAs from other organisms, i.e. Bacillus subtilis scRNA, Halobacterium halobium 7S RNA and eukaryotic 7SL RNAs. This suggests a common function in all organisms, which could be related to protein translocation, since 7SL RNA is essential for this process in eukaryotes. We have analysed the structure and expression of the 4.5S RNA gene from another gram-negative eubacterium, Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The single copy gene encodes a 113 nucleotides long RNA, which shares 75% sequence homology to the E. coli 4.5S RNA and also exhibits the completely conserved hairpin structure of the corresponding RNAs of B. subtilis and E. coli. Transcription initiates 24 nucleotides upstream from the mature 5&apos; end and exceeds beyond the 4.5S RNA coding region. A distal open reading frame, similar to that described for E. coli, does not exist downstream from the P. aeruginosa 4.5S RNA gene.    We studied the fluorescence properties of a single tyrosine (Tyr94) located in the C-terminal tail of transcription factor 1 (TF1), a type II procaryotic DNA binding protein encoded by the Bacillus subtilis phage SPO1. The time-resolved fluorescence intensity of Tyr94 in free TF1 dimers decays as a single exponential, and this is consistent with a twofold symmetrical structure. The fluorescence is readily quenched by acrylamide, but it is less accessible to anionic quenchers (iodide and citrate), suggesting that the tyrosine is located on the protein surface in a negatively charged environment provided by neighboring Glu95 and Asp96 residues. TF1 dimers associate at moderate concentrations (greater than 0.02 mg/mL) as judged from concentration dependencies in the molar fluorescence intensity, the steady-state fluorescence polarization, and the bimolecular quenching constants. Nonspecific binding of TF1 to SPO1 and calf thymus (CT) DNA and various double-stranded polynucleotides quenches the Tyr94 fluorescence to varying extent. Fluorescence lifetimes of TF1 in the bound state correlate with spectral overlaps between TF1 emission and DNA absorption, demonstrating that excitation energy transfer to DNA bases contributes significantly to the observed quenching. From analysis of the observed quenching in the DNA complexes we conclude that Tyr94 is located within 10-14 A of the DNA helix axis and not in direct contact with the DNA bases. Equilibrium analyses based on fluorescence titrations show that the maximum binding density on DNA extrapolates to ca. 1 TF1 dimer/5 DNA base pairs. We find several differences in TF1 binding to SPO1 DNA, which contains hydroxymethyluracil instead of thymine, and CT DNA: (i) The tyrosine residue is less exposed to the solvent in the SPO1 DNA complex than in the CT DNA complex. (ii) D2O addition enhances the Tyr94 fluorescence when TF1 binds to SPO1 DNA but not when it binds to CT DNA. (iii) The TF1-SPO1 DNA complex is stable at higher NaC1 concentrations than is the TF1-CT DNA complex, and its formation involves the dissociation of more Na+ ions than does the TF1-CT DNA complex. On the basis of these observations and the fact that the Tyr94-containing tail of TF1 is essential for binding to SPO1 DNA, we discuss various models for the TF1-DNA complex.    The Streptococcus mutans GS-5 scrA gene coding for enzyme IIScr of the phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent sucrose phosphotransferase system (PTS) was localized upstream from the scrB gene coding for sucrose-6-phosphate hydrolase activity after Mu dE transposon mutagenesis of plasmid pMH613. The cloned scrA gene product was identified as a 68-kilodalton protein by minicell analysis after isolation of the gene in plasmid pD4. In addition, the membrane fraction from Escherichia coli cells containing pD4 exhibited sucrose PTS activity upon complementation with enzyme I and HPr from strain GS-5. The nucleotide sequence of the scrA region revealed that this gene was located immediately upstream from the scrB gene and divergently transcribed from the opposite DNA strand. The scrA gene was preceded by potential Shine-Dalgarno and promoterlike sequences and was followed by a transcription terminator-like sequence. The scrA gene coded for an enzyme IIScr protein of 664 amino acid residues with a calculated molecular weight of 69,983. This enzyme IIScr protein was larger than the comparable proteins from Bacillus subtilis and E. coli containing sucrose-metabolizing plasmid pUR400. The 491-amino-acid N-terminal sequence of the S. mutans enzyme IIScr was homologous with the B. subtilis and E. coli sequences, and the 173-amino-acid C-terminal sequence of the S. mutans protein was also homologous with the Salmonella typhimurium enzyme IIIGlc and the 162-amino-acid C terminus of E. coli enzyme IIBgl. These results suggest that the sucrose PTS system of S. mutans is enzyme III independent.    The prokaryotic protein HU, integration host factor (IHF) from Escherichia coli, and transcription factor 1 (TF1) from bacteriophage SPO1 are closely related molecules. Biochemical results suggest that the role of these proteins is to bind and bend DNA. From the high-resolution structure of HU, we propose a model for this interaction with DNA. Crucial amino acid differences between the proteins can be rationalized in terms of their different specific functions.    The nucleotide sequence of a 1689bp fragment of the Bacillus subtilis locus containing ptsX (a crr-like gene), ptsH (coding for HPr), and the 5&apos;-end of ptsI (coding for Enzyme I) was determined. The deduced amino acid sequences of ptsH and the N-terminal part of ptsI were compared to those of Streptococcus faecalis and Escherichia coli. Transcription fusion demonstrated that ptsHI constitutes an operon. An open reading frame overlapping the main part of ptsH in the opposite sense was shown to be expressed in vivo, using protein fusions with beta-galactosidase. The deduced amino acid sequence of ptsX showed significant homology with that of Salmonella typhimurium glucose-specific Enzyme III. ptsX was preceded by an open reading frame whose amino acid sequence showed strong homology with the C-terminal part of E. coli Enzyme IIGlc.    We present evidence indicating that the previously studied, sporulation-induced gene 0.3 kb, which encodes a stable RNA present at late developmental stages, is transcribed in the forespore chamber of sporulating cells of Bacillus subtilis. Compartmentalized gene expression was demonstrated on the basis of subcellular fractionation experiments in which severalfold-higher levels of 0.3 kb-directed beta-galactosidase specific activity were observed in forespore extracts than in extracts from the mother cell and dependence studies in which 0.3 kb transcription was found to be blocked in mutants bearing mutations in spoIIIA, spoIIIE, and spoIIIG, genes which are known to govern forespore gene expression. Also, 0.3 kb transcription could be switched on during growth in cells in which transcription of the forespore regulatory gene spoIIIG was engineered to be activated in response to the lac inducer IPTG (isopropyl-beta-D-thiogalactopyranoside). Although it is transcribed in the forespore, 0.3 kb is switched on at a later developmental stage than other previously studied forespore-expressed genes, and hence it appears to be representative of an additional temporal class of compartmentalized gene expression.    We report the overexpression, purification, and properties of the regulatory protein, MerR, for a chromosomally encoded mercury resistance determinant from Bacillus strain RC607. This protein is similar in sequence to the metalloregulatory proteins encoded by gram-negative resistance determinants found on transposons Tn21 and Tn501 and to a predicted gene product of a Staphylococcus aureus resistance determinant. In vitro DNA-binding and transcription experiments were used to demonstrate those purified Bacillus MerR protein controls transcription from a promoter-operator site similar in sequence to that found in the transposon resistance determinants. The Bacillus MerR protein bound in vitro to its promoter-operator region in both the presence and absence of mercuric ion and functioned as a negative and positive regulator of transcription. The MerR protein bound less tightly to its operator region (ca. 50- to 100-fold) in the presence of mercuric ion; this reduced affinity was largely accounted for by an increased rate of dissociation of the MerR protein from the DNA. Despite this reduced DNA-binding affinity, genetic and biochemical evidence support a model in which the MerR protein-mercuric ion complex is a positive regulator of operon transcription. Although the Bacillus MerR protein bound only weakly to the heterologous Tn501 operator region, the Tn501 and Tn21 MerR proteins bound with high affinity to the Bacillus promoter-operator region and exhibited negative, but not positive, transcriptional control.    Chloroquine inhibited the outgrowth of Bacillus subtilis spores at a 10-fold lower concentration than that required to prevent vegetative growth. Analysis of macromolecular synthesis in outgrowing spores and vegetative cells in the presence of chloroquine indicated that it acted preferentially on transcription. Differential sensitivity of outgrowing spores and vegetative cells to chloroquine was not due to changes in the specificity of the RNA-polymerase, since RNA-polymerase activity measured in permeabilized cells was not affected differently by the drug. The preferential inhibition of spore outgrowth was not evident at pH 8.0, at which the majority of chloroquine is in a monovalent, more lipophilic, form. In the presence of inhibitors affecting membrane potential, vegetative cells were as sensitive to chloroquine as outgrowing spores. Measurement of [14C]-chloroquine uptake showed that early outgrowing spores accumulated twice as much drug as resistant late outgrowing spores and seven times more than vegetative cells. Treatment of vegetative cells with metabolic inhibitors led them to accumulate chloroquine to the levels found in outgrowing spores. Therefore, the preferential inhibition of outgrowing spores by chloroquine is the result of increased uptake of the drug, reflecting differences in energy metabolism from vegetative cells.    Some aspects of the regulation of alpha-amylase synthesis in Bacillus licheniformis CCM 2205 were investigated. The effect of actinomycin D and chloramphenicol was studied at the level of RNA transcription and translation. alpha-amylase synthesis in Bacillus licheniformis CCM 2205 was practically not altered during the first 20 min after the addition of actinomycin D, although RNA synthesis was almost completely blocked. In contrast to RNA polymerase inhibitor, chloramphenicol stopped immediately the synthesis of alpha-amylase. By using the least squares method the mean half-life of alpha-amylase mRNA was calculated to range from 7.5 to 8.4 min. the mean half-life of cell protein mRNA was determined to range from 2.6 to 3.8 min. Having in mind the immediate effect of chloramphenicol on the alpha-amylase synthesis, it can be concluded that de novo protein synthesis is required in the case of actinomycin D resistant residual synthesis.    The nucleotide sequence of the Bacillus anthracis edema factor (EF) gene (cya), which encodes a calmodulin-dependent adenylate cyclase, has been determined. EF is part of the tripartite protein exotoxin of B. anthracis. An ATG start codon, immediately upstream from codons which specify the first 15 amino acids (aa) of EF, was preceded by an AAAGGAGGT sequence which is its probable ribosome-binding site. Starting at this ATG codon, there was a continuous 2400-bp open reading frame which encodes the 800-aa EF-precursor protein with a Mr of 92,464. The mature, secreted protein (767 aa; Mr 88,808) was preceded by a 33-aa signal peptide which has characteristics in common with leader peptides for other secreted proteins of the Bacillus species. A consensus amino acid sequence (Gly-X-X-X-X-Gly-Lys-Ser,X = any aa), which was part of the presumed ATP binding site for EF, was also present. The codon usage of the EF gene reflected the high A + T (71%) base composition for its DNA. B. anthracis EF was not related to the Escherichia coli or yeast adenylate cyclases, but was related to the Bordetella pertussis calmodulin-dependent adenylate cyclase.    The attachment of virulent Mycoplasma pneumoniae to the ciliated epithelium of the respiratory tract involves a surface protein designated P1. Our previous determination of the nucleotide sequence of the P1 attachment-protein gene revealed that it is flanked by open reading frames (ORFs) and there is no obvious ribosome-binding site (RBS) or transcription termination sequence in the adjacent regions. We extended this analysis by cloning and sequencing the 18-kb region containing the P1 gene. This study indicates that the P1 gene is transcribed as part of a larger polycistronic message. The P1 operon is composed of the P1 gene and two predicted genes, designated ORF-4 and ORF-6. The gene order is ORF-4, P1, ORF-6 with intervening regions of 12 and 5 nt, respectively. ORF-4 and ORF-6 have respective coding capacities for proteins of Mr approximately equal to 28,000 and Mr approximately equal to 130,000. Putative promoter and RBS sequences which correspond closely to those found in Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis, as well as a sequence indicative of a transcription terminator, have been found in the flanking sequences. The transcription start point has been determined by primer extension of M. pneumoniae RNA.    A new &apos;Bacillus natto&apos; gene, senN, that regulates the expression of several extracellular proteins in B. subtilis has been cloned and sequenced. senN codes for a small, highly basic protein with an amino acid sequence different from the products coded by the regulatory genes sacQ, sacV, prtR and hpr. SenN stimulates gene expression at the transcriptional level. A putative homologous locus has been detected in the B. subtilis chromosome by Southern blotting.    The sigma-factor composition of Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase alters during endospore formation. The best-documented change is the appearance of a major sporulation-specific sigma factor (sigma epsilon), which is an RNA polymerase subunit readily detected at 2 to 4 h into the 8-h sporulation process. To determine the nature of the RNA polymerase in differentiating cells after the period of sigma epsilon abundance, we isolated RNA polymerase from cells that were harvested at 6 h after the onset of sporulation. Highly purified fractions of RNA polymerase from these cells contained at least six proteins which cosedimented with core RNA polymerase (beta beta&apos; alpha 2) during glycerol gradient centrifugation. Most of these proteins were in the size range of 20,000 to 29,000 daltons, although one 90,000-dalton protein was also evident. None of the putative RNA polymerase subunits were present in quantities similar to that observed for sigma epsilon during its period of prominence in the cell but instead resembled the minor vegetative-cell sigma factors in abundance. In vitro transcriptions using cloned B. subtilis DNAs as templates revealed at least two novel transcriptional activities in the enzyme that was isolated from cells at 6 h after the onset of sporulation but absent in an RNA polymerase preparation extracted from cells at 4 h after the onset of sporulation. One of these activities was reconstituted by the addition of a 25,000 to 27,000-dalton protein fraction to core RNA polymerase.    Some genetic and biochemical properties of the tetracycline resistance element of the Staphylococcus aureus plasmid pT181 have been studied. Resequencing of a portion of the tetracycline resistance gene (tet) showed the presence of a single open reading frame of 1,299 nucleotides capable of encoding a polypeptide of 433 amino acids. Analysis of BAL 31 nuclease-generated deletion mutants of the tet gene showed the presence of two complementation groups within this region. Northern blot hybridizations demonstrated that the tet gene encodes a single mRNA, and its initiation site has been mapped by S1 nuclease protection experiments. We also identified an approximately 52,000-dalton tetracycline-inducible polypeptide in Bacillus subtilis minicells carrying pT181. Induction of the tet gene by tetracycline resulted in a 4-fold increase in the levels of TET mRNA and at least a 15-fold increase in the amount of TET protein in B. subtilis minicells.    The Streptomyces coelicolor glutamine synthetase (GS) structural gene (glnA) was cloned by complementing the glutamine growth requirement of an Escherichia coli strain containing a deletion of its glnALG operon. Expression of the cloned S. coelicolor glnA gene in E. coli cells was found to require an E. coli plasmid promoter. The nucleotide sequence of an S. coelicolor 2280-bp DNA segment containing the glnA gene was determined and the complete glnA amino acid sequence deduced. Comparison of the derived S. coelicolor GS protein sequence with the amino acid sequences of GS from other bacteria suggests that the S. coelicolor GS protein is more similar to the GS proteins from Gram-negative bacteria than it is with the GS proteins from two Gram-positive bacteria, Bacillus subtilis and Clostridium acetobutylicum.    Genes for the principal sigma factor (rpoD genes) of various eubacteria were identified with a synthetic oligonucleotide probe corresponding to a conserved sequence in rpoD gene products of Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis. Multiple rpoD homologs were found in the strains of Micrococcus, Pseudomonas, and Streptomyces, whereas single genes were detected in E. coli, B. subtilis, and Staphylococcus aureus. The four rpoD homologs of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) were cloned and sequenced. A homologous portion with 13 amino acids was found in the rpoD genes of S. coelicolor A3(2), E. coli, and B. subtilis and was named the &quot;rpoD box.&quot;    Sporulation begins coincidentally with the expression of several stationary-phase-associated gene products during the transition state of a culture from exponential to stationary phase. Mutations in the stage 0 sporulation genes prevent the expression of these gene products in addition to blocking sporulation. Suppressor mutations in the abrB gene, in a spo0 background, restore stationary-phase-associated gene expression but not sporulation. The nature of the abrB gene product was investigated by isolating and sequencing the abrB gene. The abrB gene coded for a 96-amino-acid protein (molecular weight 10773) and contained a helix-turn-helix structure common to DNA binding proteins. Analysis of expression of the abrB gene using lacZ transcription fusions and direct measurement of mRNA content by hybridization showed that the spo0A gene repressed transcription of the abrB gene. Primer extension analysis of abrB gene mRNA revealed two initiation sites. The downstream site was dramatically repressed in spo0A+ strains, while the upstream site appeared not to be regulated by spo0A. Five abrB mutant alleles were cloned and sequenced. One mutation, abrB4, resided within the structural gene and continued to overexpress abrB messenger RNA from both promoters. A promoter mutation, abrB15, reduced transcription from the downstream promoter but not the upstream promoter. Thus, the phenotype of abrB mutations results from inactivation of the abrB gene product or by prevention of its overexpression. The results suggest that the abrB gene codes for a regulator which controls several genes whose products are normally produced during the transition phase between active growth and sporulation. The level of this regulator is, in turn, controlled by the spo0A gene. The pleiotropic phenotypes of spo0A mutants result from uncontrolled overexpression of the abrB regulator.    The sacU locus has been cloned by using two independent strategies, and the presence of two open reading frames was deduced from the nucleotide sequence. Open reading frame 1 encodes a 45,000-dalton polypeptide that is similar to the products of the Salmonella typhimurium cheA and Escherichia coli cpxA genes, which act as sensory transducers. Open reading frame 2 encodes a 26,000-dalton polypeptide that is similar to a family of transcriptional activators, including the products of the Bacillus subtilis spoOA and spoOF and the E. coli ompR and dye genes. These similarities suggest that the products of the B. subtilis sacU locus form a sensor-transducer couple, which functions to relay information about specific environmental changes to the transcription apparatus.    Glucose dehydrogenase beings to accumulate in the forespore between 2 and 3 h after the onset of endospore formation in Bacillus subtilis. The promoter for the structural gene for glucose dehydrogenase (gdh) was shown to be located 800 base pairs upstream from the coding sequence by examining the effects of integrating plasmids into the gdh region of the chromosome. The location of the gdh promoter was confirmed by primer extension analysis and by the identification of two single-base substitutions in the gdh promoter that prevented its function. The results of cell fractionation experiments with a strain that contained a transcriptional fusion of the gdh promoter and lacZ indicated that the forespore-specific accumulation of glucose dehydrogenase during sporulation is probably due to forespore-specific transcription of gdh.    The outB gene of Bacillus subtilis is under the control of two promoters (P1 and P2). To study the regulation of expression from the P1 promoter we have constructed a set of multicopy plasmids carrying different portions of the outB region and analyzed the transcripts present in vivo by RNase protection experiments. The data indicate that the product of gene outB regulates its own transcription from the P1 promoter. We also constructed an outB-lacZ fusion in an insertional plasmid. The plasmid was inserted into the chromosome adjacent to or distal from the outB gene. Assays of beta-galactosidase activity and RNase protection experiments are in accordance with a model implying that the product of gene outB regulates the initiation of transcription from the P1 promoter acting in the cis configuration.    Signal-sequence-coding regions for protein export were selected from chromosomal Bacillus subtilis DNA. The number of different signals obtained was higher than expected on the basis of known exported proteins in B. subtilis. Most of the selected regions showed the characteristics of typical signal sequences, including a basic N-terminal region followed by a hydrophobic core and a potential signal-peptidase cleavage site. The signal-coding regions were functionally interchangeable between the B. licheniformis alpha-amylase and Escherichia coli TEM beta-lactamase genes. In addition to the signal-sequence-coding regions, the nature of the host cells, and the mature parts of the reporter proteins contributed to the amounts of protein secreted.    The Bacillus subtilis hom gene, encoding homoserine dehydrogenase (L-homoserine:NADP+ oxidoreductase, EC 1.1.1.3) has been cloned and its nucleotide sequence determined. The B. subtilis enzyme expressed in Escherichia coli is sensitive by inhibition by threonine and allows complementation of a strain lacking homoserine dehydrogenases I and II. Nucleotide sequence analysis indicates that the hom stop codon overlaps the start codon of thrC (threonine synthase) suggesting that these genes, as well as thrB (homoserine kinase) located downstream from thrC, belong to the same transcription unit. The deduced amino acid sequence of the B. subtilis homoserine dehydrogenase shows extensive similarity with the C-terminal part of E. coli aspartokinases-homoserine dehydrogenases I and II; this similarity starts at the exact point where the similarity between E. coli or B. subtilis aspartokinases and E. coli aspartokinases-homoserine dehydrogenases stops. These data suggest that the E. coli bifunctional polypeptide could have resulted from the direct fusion of ancestral aspartokinase and homoserine dehydrogenase. The B. subtilis homoserine dehydrogenase has a C-terminal extension of about 100 residues (relative to the E. coli enzymes) that could be involved in the regulation of the enzyme activity.    Although the sequence and organization of many Bacillus subtilis tRNA genes are known, primary transcripts from these regions have not been previously analyzed. In this paper, S1 nuclease mapping, S1-type mapping, and Northern analyses were applied to the end of the 23 S rRNA, the 5 S rRNA, and the 21 tRNA genes of B. subtilis operon rrnB. Primary transcripts from the 5 S rRNA and tRNA genes up to approximately 600-800 nucleotides long were observed with S1-type mapping. The presence of discrete bands of processing intermediates indicated preferred processing points within the initial transcript. S1 nuclease mapping delineated a start point for transcription between the second and third tRNA genes. The -10 sequence was within the 37-base pair spacer region between tRNA genes, and the -35 sequence was within the structural gene for the upstream tRNA. Precursors from this region were evident during midexponential growth and two sporulation stages. Thus, in addition to promotion from the rRNA promoters, 19 of the 21 downstream tRNA genes are also under the control of an internal tRNA gene promoter. The accompanying paper (Vold, B. S., Green, C. J., Narasimhan, N., Strem, M., and Hansen, J. N. (1988) J. Biol. Chem. 263, 14485-14490) investigates the minor 5 S rRNA and 16 tRNA genes of another rRNA-tRNA gene set and emphasizes unique promoter elements in that system as well as a potentially unique rRNA processing scheme.    This is part of a series of two papers on gene regulation in Bacillus subtilis rRNA-tRNA operons that contain large clusters of tRNA genes. The preceding paper (Vold, B.S., Okamoto, K., Murphy, B.J., and Green, C.J. (1988) J. Biol. Chem. 263, 14480-14484) investigates the rrnB operon containing 21 tRNA genes, and this paper investigates a B. subtilis rRNA-tRNA operon containing 16 tRNA genes and a minor 5 S rRNA. Hybridization studies suggest this minor 5 S rRNA occurs as a single copy in the B. subtilis 168 genome. S1 nuclease mapping indicates that this minor 5 S rRNA gene has its own promoter. No promoters have been found immediately 5&apos; to any of the major 5 S rRNA species in B. subtilis rRNA operons. S1 mapping of the spacer region between the 23 S and minor 5 S rRNA revealed that the maturation of the 23 S rRNA in this operon may arise from an unusual processing mechanism. S1 nuclease mapping experiments suggest the existence of a promoter element immediately upstream of the last gene, for tRNA(Leu CAA), in the operon. A precursor leucine tRNA resulting from transcription of this last tRNA gene was observed in Northern hybridizations, and the amounts of this precursor increased during sporulation. A single terminator-like element is located just upstream of this last tRNA gene; however, S1 nuclease mapping experiments suggest that some read-through transcription occurs. Thus, all 16 tRNA genes are under control of the upstream 16 S rRNA promoters and the minor 5 S rRNA promoter. However, the last tRNA gene is primarily under the control of its own unique promoter.    Processing of multimeric precursor tRNAs from Bacillus subtilis by the catalytic RNA component of RNase P was studied in vitro. Previous studies on processing by either Escherichia coli or B. subtilis RNase P-RNA utilized monomeric or dimeric substrates. In the experiments described here, a multimeric precursor tRNA containing six complete tRNA sequences and the partial sequence of a seventh were used. One species did not encode the 3&apos;-terminal CCA sequence and the partial tRNA lacked 3&apos; nucleotides and could form only a 3-base pair instead of a 7-base paired aminoacyl stem. Two species had the potential for forming extended base-paired aminoacyl stems. Processing was studied under varied ionic conditions. Chemical sequencing of the products showed that the RNase P-RNA cleavage produced the proper mature 5&apos; termini for all of the six complete tRNA species, but no 5&apos;-cleavage of the partial species was observed. At suboptimal ionic concentrations, the two species capable of forming extended base-paired aminoacyl stems were not observed. Thus, encoding of the 3&apos;-CCA in a tRNA species is not critical for processing, but the formation of an aminoacyl stem with more than 3 base pairs is necessary. Particularly noteworthy was the observation that all species of the multimeric precursor could be processed at significantly lower ionic conditions than monomeric precursors used previously by ourselves and others. However, a single precursor species produced from the multimeric precursor could also be processed at the same lower ionic conditions as the multimeric precursor. This demonstrates that precursor tRNA species can differ widely in their ionic requirements for processing and that, to a large extent, the optimal conditions of MgCl2 or NH4Cl are a function of the substrate which is used.    By insertional mutagenesis, 36 transformation-deficient, mitomycin C-sensitive Bacillus subtilis mutants were isolated, 16 of which were ATP-dependent DNase (ADD) deficient. PBS1 transduction showed that the mutations were closely linked to the metD marker and weakly linked to the glyB marker. With the aid of one of the mutants, a transcription unit involved in ADD synthesis was cloned. The chromosomal location of the transcription unit was established at the restriction site level by determining the presence or absence of ADD in transformants of wild-type cells obtained with various DNA fragments inserted in pUC derivatives. The transcription unit complemented a mutant in which the add transcription unit had been deleted.    Several hundred bacterial isolates were screened for bacteriolytic activity by growing them on agar medium containing autoclaved, lyophilized Micrococcus lysodeikticus cells as the substrate. A Bacillus sp. producing the largest lytic zone was selected. A genomic bank of this selected bacterium was constructed in the multi-functional vector pTZ18R, with partial SauIIIA DNA fragments inserted at the SalI restriction site. Screening of 800 colonies of this bank for cell lysis gave 5 recombinants exhibiting lytic activity, as detected by analysis of extracts of sonicated Escherichia coli cells on denaturing polyacrylamide gels containing autoclaved, lyophilized M. lysodeikticus cells as the substrate. One clone (pBH2500), expressed in E. coli strain NM522, was found to code for a lytic enzyme corresponding, in molecular weight, to the 27 kDa Bacillus sp. hydrolase. This clone with an insertion of 2.5 kb was then subcloned as a 929 bp EcoRI-SauIIIA fragment in pTZ18R (pBH929) and showed higher cell lytic activity. A unique open reading frame for a protein of 251 amino acids, followed by a putative terminator sequence, was found after a consensus ribosome binding site. A putative leader sequence was identified in the first 37 amino acids. One truncated subclone (pBH703), corresponding to 196 out of 251 residues from the protein N-terminal end, still possessed lytic activity.    The sporulation-essential gene spoIIG of the Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis encodes the sporulation-specific sigma factor sigma 29(sigma E). We report here the initial characterization of a gene, referred to as ORF3, located immediately downstream of the spoIIG gene. The results indicate that ORF3 encodes a sigma homolog, whose expression is highly regulated during development. Analysis of the ORF3 nucleotide sequence reveals an open reading frame encoding a polypeptide of 260 amino acid residues (molecular mass of 30.1 kDa). Its predicted amino acid sequence shows significant similarity to that of other RNA polymerase sigma factor sequences. S1 nuclease mapping experiments indicate that ORF3 is initially cotranscribed with spoIIG from about 1 to 4 hr into the sporulation process and that later on ORF3 is transcribed independently from a new site located between spoIIG and ORF3. The role of ORF3 was investigated by constructing a deletion mutation in its structural gene. The mutant exhibits normal growth but is unable to produce heat-resistant spores. We propose that the ORF3 gene product is a sigma factor or a related peptide essential for sporulation at a late stage of development.    Many prokaryotic origins resemble E. coli oriC in possessing essential AT-rich sequences, tandemly repeated. The role of these repeats may be in the initial opening of the duplex by the initiator protein, as has been found for the 13-mers in oriC and is implied for the 11-mers of the lambda origin. Regulatory influences on the effective action of the initiator protein of E. coli (dnaA protein) include transcriptional activation of the origin, nucleotide binding and membrane attachment of the protein, and interactions leading to the introduction of helicases to start replication forks.    The GntR protein is a negative regulator involved in gluconate-inducible expression of the Bacillus subtilis gnt operon which is responsible for gluconate metabolism. The GntR protein has been purified to homogeneity from an overproducing Escherichia coli strain harboring a gntR gene-carrying plasmid. The total amino acid composition and the NH2-terminal amino acid sequence of the purified protein were essentially the same as those deduced from the nucleotide sequence of the gntR gene. Molecular weight determination by gel filtration revealed that the purified protein is in a highly polymerized form, but it likely exists as a dimer when highly diluted. The purified GntR protein was found to be specifically bound to DNA fragments carrying the promoter of the gnt operon in an electrophoretic mobility shift assay. This binding was specifically inhibited by the addition of gluconate or glucono-delta-lactone. The purified protein repressed in vitro transcription from the promoter of the gnt operon. This repression was suppressed by gluconate or glucono-delta-lactone. These results indicate that the GntR protein is a repressor for the gnt operon and that gluconate and glucono-delta-lactone are inducers for this operon.    The gene for MRP7, a 40-kilodalton protein of the large subunit of the yeast mitochondrial ribosome, was identified in a lambda gt11 expression library by immunological screening with a monoclonal antibody to MRP7. An intact copy of MRP7 was then isolated from a yeast genomic library by colony hybridization. Gene disruption showed that MRP7 protein was essential for ribosomal function. Sequencing of MRP7 revealed a coding region for a basic (pI 10.6), 43.2-kilodalton protein containing 371 amino acid residues. Amino acid residues 28 to 112 of the deduced MRP7 sequence aligned with the 84 residues of the Escherichia coli ribosomal protein L27, but no significant similarity was detected between the carboxy-terminal 259 amino acids of MRP7 and other protein sequences in existing computer data bases. Within the aligned region, there was 49% amino acid identity between MRP7 and L27, compared with the 57% identity observed between L27 and its homolog in Bacillus stearothermophilus. The steady-state levels of the MRP7 protein and its mRNA were monitored in response to catabolite repression and to increased dosage of the MRP7 gene. The response to catabolite repression was characterized by a ninefold change in the level of the protein and little, if any, change in the level of the mRNA. In cells carrying the MRP7 gene on a high-copy-number plasmid, the mRNA was increased 20-fold, but there was no significant increase in MRP7 protein. Furthermore, MRP7 mRNA and protein accumulated at normal levels in [rho0] cells, which are devoid of 21S rRNA, indicating that the protein is relatively stable in the absence of ribosome assembly. Together, these results suggest that MRP7 is regulated posttranscriptionally, probably at the level of protein synthesis rather than protein turnover.    The elastase structural gene (lasB) from Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 has been previously cloned on an 8-kilobase (kb) DNA fragment. The lasB gene, cloned in both orientations in pUC18, produced elastase in Escherichia coli, indicating that its promoter and translation initiation sites are functional in E. coli. Deletion analysis further defined the location of the lasB gene to a 3.0-kb EcoRI-KpnI fragment (pRB1803). Elastase prepared from E. coli TB1 (pRB1803) corresponded in molecular weight to mature P. aeruginosa extracellular elastase (33,000). The lasB gene directed the synthesis of 54- and 50-kilodalton (kDa) proteins in a bacterial cell-free transcription-translation system. The 33-, 50-, and 54-kDa proteins reacted with elastase-specific antiserum. To further characterize the lasB gene, the nucleotide sequence of the 3.0-kb EcoRI-KpnI fragment was determined. This DNA fragment contained a 1,491-base-pair open reading frame encoding 498 amino acids, corresponding to a predicted molecular weight of 53,600. The deduced amino acid sequence contained a putative signal sequence followed by a large polypeptide which preceded the mature 33-kDa elastase protein. Three zinc ligands and an active site were predicted for the mature elastase on the basis of its amino acid sequence homology with Bacillus thermoproteolyticus thermolysin.    The replication terminus, terC, of Bacillus subtilis is the chromosomal site at which movement of the clockwise replication fork is blocked. The effect of deletion or modification of DNA sequences on either side of terC (defined by the sequence location of the arrested clockwise fork junction) has been investigated. Deletion of sequences ahead of terC to within 250 base pairs (bp) had no effect on fork arrest, whereas removal of a further 130 bp abolished it. The 250-bp segment immediately ahead of terC encompassed the previously identified inverted repeat region as well as potential promoters for the transcription of an adjoining open reading frame (ORF). Deletion of DNA from the other side of terC up to 80 bp from it also abolished fork arrest. This deletion removed the bulk of the ORF. Disruption of this ORF by the insertion of 4 bp also abolished fork arrest. A model for clockwise fork arrest at terC, implicating both the inverted repeat region and the protein product of the ORF, is proposed.    The lytic Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage SPO1 encodes an abundant, 99-amino-acid type II DNA-binding protein, transcription factor 1 (TF1). TF1 is special in this family of procaryotic chromatin-forming proteins in its preference for hydroxymethyluracil-containing DNA, such as SPO1 DNA, and in binding with high affinity to specific sites in the SPO1 chromosome. We constructed recessive null alleles of the TF1 gene and introduced them into SPO1 chromosomes. Segregation analysis with partially diploid phage heterozygous for TF1 showed that phage bearing only these null alleles was inviable. Deletion of the nine C-proximal amino acids of TF1 prohibited phage multiplication in vivo and abolished its site-specific DNA-binding activity in vitro.    Expression of a 4 kb segment of the bacteriocinogenic plasmid, pIP404, from Clostridium perfringens is inducible by UV-irradiation. DNA sequence analysis revealed that this region contains three genes: uviA, uviB and bcn encoding the bacteriocin BCN5. Biochemical studies with mRNAs showed that expression was controlled at the transcriptional level and that the genes were organized in two independent transcriptional units, uviAB and bcn, both directed by tandem promoters inducible by UV light. The bcn gene is transcribed from three promoters (P1, P2, P3) while transcription of uviAB is directed by two promoters (P4, P5). With the exception of P4, which bears some resemblance to the consensus eubacterial promoter sequence, none of these promoters was recognized in vitro by the major forms of RNA polymerase from C. perfringens, Bacillus subtilis or Escherichia coli. Promoters P1, P3 and P5, which show striking homology with each other, contain unusual sequences in the &apos;-35&apos; and &apos;-10&apos; regions known to be recognized by RNA polymerase and this might indicate positive control.    The total sequence of a 6,314-base-pair BglII fragment of the Bacillus subtilis chromosome containing the spo0F locus has been accomplished. Several genes of interest have been identified on this DNA fragment. The ctrA locus was recognized as coding for CTP synthetase by comparison of its deduced sequence with that of Escherichia coli CTP synthetase. A total of 53% of the residues are identical between the enzymes from these organisms. The spo0F locus was followed immediately by a locus, tsr, required for RNA synthesis in this organism. Temperature-sensitive mutations within the tsr locus have been identified, but strains with deletions of the locus are nonviable. It was concluded that tsr codes for an unknown essential component of the RNA synthesis machinery. The tsr gene was followed by another open reading frame which could code for a protein of 19,975 Mr. This gene was translated in vivo, but deletion-insertion mutations within the gene had no phenotype. The gene was cotranscribed with the tsr gene, although about 50% of the transcripts terminated between the two genes. The rev-4 mutation which reverts the sporulation-defective phenotype of erythromycin-resistant mutants was located to a partial open reading frame at the end of the fragment. Disruption of this open reading frame by deletion-insertion mutation did not result in a discernible phenotype. S1 protection experiments located the start sites of transcription for several of the genes on this fragment. The spo0F gene was found to be monocistronic. Regulation of the identified genes was investigated by using beta-galactosidase gene fusions.    The effect of DNA upstream of the -35 region on promoter function was examined using two promoters isolated from the Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage SP82. The affinity of RNA polymerase for the two promoters in vitro differed significantly. For each promoter the nucleotide sequence of the upstream DNA was characterized by the presence of successive runs of adenines with a 10-11-base pair periodicity. DNA fragments with the polyadenine-containing upstream DNA displayed aberrant electrophoretic mobilities when analyzed on polyacrylamide gels indicative of curved DNA. A series of mutant promoters in which the upstream DNA was deleted or altered was constructed. The curved DNA upstream of the -35 region was required for efficient RNA polymerase binding. Decreased in vitro transcription observed when the upstream DNA was deleted could be partially restored if the template was negatively supercoiled. Measurements of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase specific activity from B. subtilis strains carrying transcriptional fusions indicate that the curved upstream DNA stimulated transcription from the promoter with the weaker affinity for RNA polymerase. The curved DNA reduced the in vivo activity of the promoter with the strong affinity for RNA polymerase. One function of the curved upstream DNA may be to provide RNA polymerase-promoter interactions that facilitate open complex formation.    Transcription of the Bacillus subtilis pur operon is regulated independently by adenine and guanine nucleotides (Ebbole, D. J., and Zalkin, H. (1987) J. Biol. Chem. 262, 8274-8287). Guanine nucleotides regulate transcription by a termination-antitermination mechanism in a 242-nucleotide, 5&apos;-untranslated mRNA leader region. We have identified an apparently intact, terminated transcript of approximately 200 nucleotides in length, having a half-life of about 0.7 min. The terminated transcript is degraded in a series of discrete steps resulting in the accumulation of stable intermediates in vivo. We have used Northern blot analysis, primer extension, and nuclease S1 mapping to align the degradation intermediates with the nucleotide sequence and assign secondary structures that may contribute to the stability of the intermediates. Degradation is initiated by endonucleolytic cleavage of the approximately 200-nucleotide terminated transcript generating approximately 93- and approximately 97-nucleotide 5&apos; and 3&apos; moieties, respectively. The approximately 93-nucleotide 5&apos; and approximately 97-nucleotide 3&apos; intermediates are further degraded to approximately 88 and approximately 58 nucleotides, respectively. The 5&apos;-end of pur operon mRNA and the attenuated transcript are degraded by different pathways.    Growth conditions established to optimize vegetative alkaline phosphatase production and stability in Bacillus subtilis were used to compare alkaline phosphatase synthesis and secretion in isogenic strains JH646 (spo0A12) and JH646MS (spo0A12 abrB15). A mutation in spo0A blocked vegetative alkaline phosphatase production, and a second mutation at the abrB locus resulted in hyperinduction of vegetative alkaline phosphatase. Phosphate regulation of vegetative alkaline phosphatase synthesis was unaffected in the double mutant. spo0H, on a multicopy plasmid, partially overcame the spo0A effect.    We have identified the transcription start site and regulatory region governing the expression of a sporulation gene in the spoIVC locus of Bacillus subtilis. Efficient expression and developmental regulation of this gene was controlled from a promoter region that extended no more than 110 base pairs upstream and no more than 4 base pairs downstream from the start site of transcription, on which basis we infer that spoIVC is regulated at the level of transcription initiation. Using a transcriptional fusion of the spoIVC gene to the lacZ gene of Escherichia coli, we found that spoIVC expression was turned on at the third to fourth hour of sporulation (at about the developmental stage [IV] that its products are required in spore formation) and that this transcription was largely restricted to the mother cell chamber of the sporangium. Mutations in many different spo genes (causing blocks at stages 0 to V) were found to influence (negatively and positively) the level of spoIVC expression. Our results distinguish the mode of spoIVC regulation from that of previously studied sporulation genes and indicate that it is representative of a new regulon of mother cell-specific gene expression.    Prediction of the secondary structure, a sequence of 33 amino acids, for the Bacillus subtilis alpha-amylase signal peptide suggested the presence of a beta-turn structure in it. Through substitution of Gly27 and/or Pro28 with Ala residues by means of the site-directed mutagenesis method, the secondary structure was predicted to consist of an alpha-helix conformation throughout the signal peptide containing a small region of random coil. The effect of the structural modification upon the secretion of proteins was analyzed as to the production of beta-lactamase after the DNA regions encoding the parental and modified signal peptides had been fused in frame to the DNA fragment for the beta-lactamase using HindIII linker DNA. The production of beta-lactamase increased to 4 to 6 times in B. subtilis cells and to 1.5 to 2.0 times in Escherichia coli with the modified signal peptides. The modification of the signal peptide affected the transcription level of the fused genes.    Core RNA polymerase and several forms of RNA polymerase holoenzyme from Bacillus subtilis are found in association with a 21,500-kDa polypeptide called delta (delta). We have cloned the structural gene (rpoE) for delta by using a hybridization probe a synthetic oligodeoxynucleotide that was designed on the basis of a partial NH2-terminal amino acid (aa) sequence of purified delta protein. The rpoE gene was found to encode a 173-aa polypeptide of a predicted Mr of 20,400. Genetic and physical mapping experiments placed rpoE at 325 degrees on the B. subtilis chromosome and established the gene order rpoE-ctrA-spo0F. The delta subunit is known to enhance the specificity of transcription in vitro by bacterial and phage SP01-modified forms of polymerase, but replacement of rpoE by an in vitro-constructed deletion-mutated gene was found not to impair viability, sporulation, or the growth of phage SP01.    The mechanism of expression of the overlapping genes that encode the alpha and beta subunits of aspartokinase II of Bacillus subtilis was studied by specific mutagenesis of the cloned coding sequence. Escherichia coli or B. subtilis VB31 (aspartokinase II-deficient), transformed with plasmids carrying either a deletion of the translation start site and about one-half of the coding region for the larger alpha subunit or a frameshift mutation early in the alpha subunit coding region, produced the smaller beta subunit in the absence of alpha subunit synthesis, indicating that beta subunit is not derived from alpha subunit and that its synthesis does not depend on the alpha subunit translation initiation site. The beta subunit translation start site was identified by oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis of the putative translation start codon. Modification of the nucleotide sequence encoding methionine residue 247 of the alpha subunit from ATG to either TTA or AAT (but not GTG) abolished beta subunit synthesis but had no effect on the production of alpha subunit. This observation is consistent with peptide chain initiation by N-formylmethionine, which specifically requires an ATG or GTG sequence, and indicates that translation of the beta subunit starts at a site corresponding to Met247 of the alpha subunit. Initial studies on the function of the aspartokinase II subunits, using E. coli as a heterologous host, showed that beta subunit was not essential for the expression of the catalytic function of aspartokinase, measured in vitro and in vivo, nor for its allosteric regulation by L-lysine. Whether the beta subunit has a function specific to B. subtilis needs to be explored in a homologous expression system.    The synthesis of the inducible enzyme penicillinase of Bacillus licheniformis is negatively controlled by a repressor (D.A. Dubnau and M.R. Pollock, J. Gen. Microbiol. 41:7-21, 1965; D. J. Sherratt and J. F. Collins, J. Gen. Microbiol. 76:217-230,1973). The molecular organization of the genes coding for penicillinase (penP) and its repressor (penI) has recently been determined (T. Himeno, T. Imanaka, and S. Aiba, J. Bacteriol. 168:1128-1132, 1986). These two genes are transcribed divergently from within a 364-nucleotide region separating the coding sequences. We cloned and sequenced the repressor gene (penIc) from strain 749/C that constitutively produces penicillinase. The penIc and penI+ (wild-type) genes were expressed in Escherichia coli. Complementation analysis indicated that the repressor is the only trans-acting protein required to regulate the expression of the penI and penP genes. We purified the wild-type repressor protein, used it in gel retardation and DNase I protection experiments, and identified three operators positioned in the region between the penP and penI coding sequences. The spatial arrangement of the operators and the hierarchy in repressor binding seen in the protection experiments indicate that (i) the penI gene product represses the expression of the penP gene by physically blocking the RNA polymerase-binding site and (ii) the penI gene is autoregulated.    Plasmid pGP1 carrying a penP-lacZ fusion was used to study structural plasmid instability in Bacillus subtilis. In only one of 28 sequenced deletion junction points in the penP-lacZ region short direct repeats (10 bp) and flanking imperfect inverted repeats (12 bp) were associated with endpoints. In 27 deletions no repeated sequences of more than 3 bp were present at the endpoints. In 15 of these the sequence 5&apos;-T-G-T-A-3&apos; was found within 10 bp from the left endpoint. At the left cleavage sites the sequence 5&apos;-T-T-T-3&apos;, or the 5&apos;-A-A-A-3&apos; complement thereof, was frequently observed. Most of the left deletion endpoints were located in potential stem-loop structures in the penP transcription/translation regulatory region, which is very rich in hyphenated dyad symmetry. Near the right deletion endpoints a sequence consisting of four G/C residues, followed by three or four A/T residues, was found in 15 cases. It is speculated that DNA topoisomerase I is involved in the formation of the deletions studied.    Transcription of the trp operon of Bacillus subtilis is regulated by attenuation. A trpE&apos;-&apos;lacZ gene fusion preceded by the wild-type trp promoter-leader region was used to analyze regulation. Overproduction of the trp leader transcript in trans from a multicopy plasmid caused constitutive expression of the chromosomal trpE&apos;-&apos;lacZ fusion, presumably by titrating a negative regulatory factor encoded by the mtr locus. Subsegments of the trp leader region cloned onto the multicopy plasmid were examined for their abilities to elevate beta-galactosidase activity. An RNA segment spanning the portion of the leader transcript that forms the promoter-proximal strand of the proposed antiterminator structure was most active in this trans test. The data suggest that the mtr gene product, when activated by tryptophan, binds to this RNA segment and prevents formation of the antiterminator. In this manner, the trans-acting factor promotes formation of the RNA structure that causes transcription termination. Secondary-structure predictions for the leader segment of the trp operon transcript suggest that if the mtr factor bound this RNA segment in a nonterminated transcript, the ribosome-binding site for the first structural gene, trpE, could be sequestered in a stable RNA structure. We tested this possibility by comparing transcriptional and translational fusions containing the initial segments of the trp operon. Our findings suggest that the mtr product causes both transcription attenuation and inhibition of translation of trpE mRNA. Inhibition of translation initiation would reduce ribosome density on trpE mRNA, perhaps making it more labile. Consistent with this interpretation, the addition of tryptophan to mtr+ cultures increased the rate of trpE&apos;-&apos;lacZ mRNA decay.    Bacillus subtilis produces several RNA polymerase sigma factors. At least two of these factors are essential for endospore formation, sigma H, which is present in vegetative cells, and sigma E, which is produced exclusively after the start of endospore formation. The structural gene that encodes sigma E is part of the spoIIG operon, which is transcribed after the onset of sporulation. We have determined the starting point of transcription and the nucleotide sequence of the spoIIG promoter. This promoter contains sequences that are similar to those found at the -10 and -35 regions of promoters that are used by E sigma A, the primary form of RNA polymerase in vegetative cells. The unusual feature of this promoter is that these putative sigma A contact sites are separated by 22 base pairs, rather than the typical 17 or 18 base pairs. Single-base substitutions in the -10-like sequence reduced utilization of the spoIIG promoter in vivo. Furthermore, E sigma A, but not E sigma H and other secondary forms of RNA polymerase, accurately initiated transcription from the spoIIG promoter in an in vitro assay; therefore, we suggest that E sigma A transcribes the spoIIG operon in vivo. A base substitution in the -35-like sequence caused constitutive transcription from the promoter in vegetative cells; therefore, regulation of this sporulation-specific transcription may involve a novel mechanism.    The gene for a beta-glucosidase from the extremely thermophilic bacterium Caldocellum saccharolyticum has been isolated from a genomic library and sequenced. An open reading frame identified by computer analysis of the sequence could encode a protein of Mr 54,400, which is close to the size of the polypeptide experimentally determined using maxicells. Analysis of the amino-terminal residues of the protein produced in Escherichia coli suggests that it is processed by a methionine aminopeptidase. A sequence within C. saccharolyticum DNA upstream of the beta-glucosidase gene was found to act as a promoter for expression of the thermophile gene in E. coli. The protein has been overproduced in E. coli and Bacillus subtilis where it retains its enzymatic activity and heat stability. There appears to be a single copy of the gene in Caldocellum DNA.    A gyrB gene from Streptomyces sphaeroides, a producer of novobiocin, has been cloned in Streptomyces lividans, where it conferred resistance to novobiocin. The Streptomyces gyrB gene was sufficiently similar to a Bacillus subtilis gyrB probe to be specifically recognized during Southern analysis. Partial purification of DNA gyrase by affinity chromatography revealed the presence of two such activities (differing in their responses to novobiocin) in the clone. The product of the cloned gene, a novobiocin-resistant DNA gyrase B subunit, was identified in vitro by coupled transcription--translation as a 79-kd protein.    An 8-kilobase HindIII fragment carrying the histidase gene (hutH) and its regulatory region (hutP), from the Bacillus subtilis histidine utilization (hut) operon, was cloned in the temperate bacteriophage phi 105. Histidine utilization was restored in a hutH1 mutant by the specialized transducing phage (phi 105hutH11). The histidase gene in phi 105hutH11 was inducible and was shown to be under catabolite repression. The nucleotide sequence of 3,932 base pairs including the hutH and hutP loci revealed three open reading frames (ORFs). The molecular weights of ORF1 and ORF2 proteins were calculated to be 16,576 (151 amino acid residues) and 55,675 (508 amino acid residues), respectively. Reverse transcriptase mapping experiments showed that the putative promoter for the hut operon could be recognized by RNA polymerase sigma 43. The transcript starts at an adenosine residue 32 base pairs upstream from the initiation codon of ORF1. hutH+-transforming activity was found in ORF2, indicating that ORF2 encoded the histidase. A hutP1 mutation was determined as a substitution of an amino acid in ORF1. By using a specialized transducing phage containing the wild-type ORF1 gene, it was demonstrated that the presence of ORF1 protein in trans was absolutely required for the induction of the hut operon in a hutP1 mutant. These data strongly suggested that ORF1 encodes a positive regulator of the hut operon.    Expression of xylose isomerase was repressed in Bacillus subtilis strains W23, 168, and BR151 and could be induced in the presence of xylose. The expression was also glucose repressed in strains 168 and BR151, although this effect was not observed with W23. A xyl-cat fusion gene was constructed on a multicopy plasmid, from which the xyl promoter located on a 366-base-pair (bp) DNA fragment derived from W23 directed the expression of chloramphenicol resistance. The regulation of expression was not very pronounced in this multicopy situation. The xyl promoter is a strong signal for transcription initiation. The 5&apos; sequence of the xyl mRNA was identified by nuclease S1 mapping. The promoter consisted of the -10 sequence TAAGAT, the -35 sequence TTGAAA spaced by 17 bp, and an upstream poly(A) block with 14 As out of 17 bp. To study the regulation, a xyl-lacZ fusion gene was constructed and integrated as a single copy into the amygene of B. subtilis 168. This strain grows blue on X-Gal (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-beta-D-galactoside) indicator plates in the presence of xylose and white in the presence of glucose. Quantitatively, the induction of beta-galactosidase by xylose was 100-fold. In the presence of xylose plus glucose, the expression of the indicator gene was repressed to 30% of the fully induced level. About 25 to 60% of the maximal lacZ expression was obtained with this strain when the 366-bp xyl DNA fragment was provided in trans on a multicopy plasmid.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    A gene encoding glucose dehydrogenase of Bacillus megaterium M1286 was isolated from a lambda-EMBL3 phage library. It is transcribed and translated in cells of the heterologous organism Escherichia coli by own control regions. The gene is located on a 1126-bp HindIII fragment. Its nucleotide sequence contains 220 bp in the 5&apos; non-coding region, 783 bp in the coding region and 123 bp in the 3&apos; non-coding region. The amino acid sequence, as deduced from the coding region, consists of 261 amino acids and is different from the known protein sequence of glucose dehydrogenase from B. megaterium M1286. [Jany, K. D., Ulmer, W., Froschle, M. &amp; Pfleiderer, G. (1984) FEBS Lett. 165, 6-10]. By using this gene as a hybridization probe a second glucose dehydrogenase gene was isolated, which was also directly expressed in E. coli. Additionally a DNA region with extended sequence homology to the hybridization probe was identified. This work indicates the existence of at least two independent glucose dehydrogenase genes in B. megaterium M1286. Homologies in the primary structures of the two different glucose dehydrogenases of B. megaterium M1286 and of the corresponding Bacillus subtilis enzyme are discussed.    We report the isolation of an RNA polymerase from sporulating cells of Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. kurstaki HD-1-Dipel that directs transcription from the promoter region of an insecticidal crystal protein gene. The core components of this RNA polymerase are associated with a polypeptide that has an apparent mass of 35 kDa. Neither RNA polymerase holoenzyme isolated from vegetative B. thuringiensis, nor the core derived from this enzyme, is capable of transcribing from the crystal protein gene promoter region; the addition of gel-purified 35-kDa polypeptide to the core reconstitutes the specific transcribing capability. The reconstituted enzyme does not direct transcription from the promoters for the ctc or spoVG genes of Bacillus subtilis; however, this form of RNA polymerase does direct transcription from a promoter for the 27-kDa crystal protein of B. thuringiensis subsp. israelensis and from a promoter for a 29-kDa polypeptide present in cuboidal crystals of B. thuringiensis subsp. kurstaki HD-1. We propose a tentative consensus sequence based on the alignment of the three B. thuringiensis promoters. This consensus sequence is different from consensus sequences reported for promoters recognized by enzymes containing other sigma subunits, suggesting that the 35-kDa polypeptide is an unusual sigma subunit.    The control of men gene expression during growth and sporulation of Bacillus subtilis was examined at the transcriptional level. Two different approaches were used. (i) Steady-state levels of men-specific mRNA were measured directly. (ii) A men&apos;-lacZ gene fusion was constructed. In both cases, it was observed that men promoter activity was maximal at the onset of sporulation and declined soon thereafter. These kinetics were similar to the pattern of menaquinone accumulation previously observed. Expression from the men promoter was independent of the presence of the products of the spo0A and spo0H genes and was enhanced by addition of glucose and glutamine to the culture medium. DNA sequence analysis of the promoter region revealed a potential recognition site for the principal vegetative form of RNA polymerase but not for any of the known minor polymerase forms. The functionality in vivo of the promoter sequence was confirmed by high-resolution S1 nuclease mapping of the transcript start site. An additional sequence element was identified that is shared by the sdhA, citG, and ctaA promoters and may indicate a common regulatory mechanism in the expression of these genes.    The Bacillus subtilis chromosomal locus that contains the genes encoding the menaquinone biosynthetic enzymes (the men genes) was cloned by using an integrable plasmid vector. The men cluster was reconstituted on three overlapping recombinant plasmids, and a tentative gene order was derived. Evaluations of the direction of transcription and of transcriptional boundaries suggested that the men genes are expressed in the form of at least one polycistronic message. In addition, a spectrum of Men phenotypes resulting from the integration of different internal fragments of the cluster indicate transcriptional complexities, possibly including an internal promoter. The size of cloned DNA fragments required to encompass the transcription unit, as well as the locations of known men mutations within these fragments, suggests that a gene(s) not previously identified with the men system is also located within the cluster. The cloned men sequences make available probes to examine the patterns of transcription from the men locus in response to changing environmental conditions and during the developmental sequence represented by endospore formation.    The hyperproduction of alkaline and neutral proteases is a phenotype of mutation at the hpr locus. This locus has been cloned and sequenced and has been found to code for a protein of 23,718 Mr. The mutations hpr-1, scoC4, and catA7 were identified by sequencing as mutations within the hpr gene. The phenotype of mutations in the hpr gene is due to loss of the hpr gene product, and therefore we suggest that the hpr gene encodes a negative regulator of protease production. This negative regulator must control genes other than protease genes, and these genes must include at least one gene required for sporulation, since overproduction of the hpr gene product by cloning the locus on a multicopy vector results in the inhibition of sporulation as well as protease production. Truncated fragments of the hpr gene or its promoter do not have this phenotype. Transcription of the hpr locus is controlled by the spoOA gene. In an spoOA mutant the hpr gene transcript is constitutively overproduced, as determined by a transcription fusion to beta-galactosidase. The results are consistent with the view that the spoOA gene may control sporulation and transcription by modulating the level and activity of several regulatory proteins.    A synthetic oligodeoxynucleotide probe was used to clone the gene encoding the phosphatidylcholine-preferring phospholipase C of Bacillus cereus. The sequence of a 2050-bp restriction fragment containing the gene was determined. Analysis of the gene-derived amino acid (aa) sequence showed that this exoenzyme is probably synthesized as a 283-aa precursor with a 24-aa signal peptide and a 14-aa propeptide. The mature, secreted enzyme comprises 245 aa residues. Sonicates of Escherichia coli HB101 carrying the gene on a multicopy plasmid showed phospholipase C activity. This activity was inhibited by Tris, a known inhibitor of the B. cereus enzyme and also by antiserum raised against pure B. cereus phospholipase C. We conclude therefore that the gene is expressed in E. coli. The cloning and sequencing described here complete the first step toward using in vitro mutagenesis for investigations of the structure-function relationships of B. cereus phospholipase C.    Transcription of some early genes occurring during phi 29 infection in the absence but not in the presence of chloramphenicol has been shown to depend upon the synthesis of the viral protein p4, the positive regulator of late transcription. In addition, the early promoter B1, responsible for early transcription on the late region of the phi 29 genome, has been accurately mapped by nuclease S1 protection experiments. The deduced promoter sequence shares homology with that of the other early phi 29 promoters previously described and with the consensus sequence of the promoters recognized by the Bacillus subtilis sigma 43-RNA polymerase.    Tn919 is a 15- to 16-kilobase (kb) tetracycline resistance conjugative transposon that was originally isolated from Streptococcus sanguis FC1. The tetracycline resistance determinant (tet) was found on a 4.2-kb HindII fragment by in vitro deletion analysis. This fragment was subcloned to a pWV01 origin capable of directing replication in Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis, and Streptococcus lactis, and expression was observed in all three genera. In all cases, expression was weaker when only the 4.2-kb cloned fragment rather than the full transposon was present. The resistance gene is of the streptococcal tetM class and codes for a protein of approximately 70 kilodaltons. The restriction map resembles that of the tetM gene of Tn1545 (P. Martin, P. Trieu-Cuot, and P. Courvalin, Nucleic Acids Res. 14:7047-7058, 1986), which codes for a protein of 72.5 kilodaltons. A number of transposon-derived promoter-bearing fragments were also cloned and sequenced. These closely resemble the consensus sequence of E. coli and B. subtilis promoters. Fusion experiments with a truncated lacZ gene indicate the possibility of an open reading frame for one of the promoters.    The adenylate cyclase gene of Bacillus anthracis, encoding the edema factor, a component of anthrax toxin, has been cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli. Clones were selected by their capacity to complement the cyclase deficiency (cya-) of an E. coli strain expressing the eukaryotic protein calmodulin, an essential activator of B. anthracis adenylate cyclase. The protein expressed in E. coli was shown to exhibit adenylate cyclase activity only in the presence of calmodulin. Experiments using a coupled in vitro transcription-translation system revealed that the protein synthesized from the cloned DNA fragment was enzymatically active, upon addition of calmodulin, and could be immunoprecipitated by antibodies directed against purified Bordetella pertussis adenylate cyclase toxin. This indicates that the two calmodulin-dependent adenylate cyclase toxins are immunologically related.    The cotA (pig) gene of Bacillus subtilis encodes a 65,000 Mr protein that is a component of the spore coat and is responsible for the brown pigment characteristic of colonies in which cells are undergoing sporulation. To study developmental regulation of the cotA gene, we identified its promoter and studied its transcription in a large number of mutants blocked at various stages of sporulation and germination. Deletion analysis showed that induction and efficient transcription of cotA required DNA sequences extending no more than 55 base pairs (bp) upstream (and no more than 130 bp downstream) from the 5&apos; terminus of cotA mRNA. Transcription from the cotA promoter was found to be switched on at approximately the time (4 to 5 h after the onset of sporulation) of spore coat synthesis and deposition. Strikingly, this transcription was substantially inhibited in almost all asporogenous mutants blocked prior to the developmental stage (V) of spore coat formation. cotA transcription was also impaired in several stage V mutants but not in other stage V mutants or in mutants blocked in germination. The germination mutant gerE caused a several-fold overexpression of cotA. The dependence of cotA expression on so many genes required at early to intermediate stages of sporulation suggests that transcription of this spore coat gene is somehow coupled (directly or through several intervening steps) to a morphological or physiological feature(s) of the developing sporangium.    Three promoters direct transcription of the sigA (rpoD) operon in Bacillus subtilis. Promoters P1 and P2 are used during the exponential growth phase, whereas P3 is used only during the stationary phase. We examined the use of these promoters in promoter-probe plasmids and found that expression from P3 was prevented by a mutation in spoOH, which encodes the secondary RNA polymerase sigma factor sigma H. Moreover, we found that sigma H-containing RNA polymerase efficiently and accurately used the P3 promoter in vitro. Evidently, this operon, which is essential for exponential growth, is transcribed during the early phase of sporulation by this secondary form of RNA polymerase. Comparison of the nucleotide sequences of the P3 promoter and the spoVG promoter, which also is used by sigma H-RNA polymerase, revealed sequences at the -10 and -35 regions of these promoters that may signal recognition of promoters by sigma H-RNA polymerase.    RNA polymerase preparations isolated from vegetatively growing Bacillus subtilis cells contain the core subunits beta, beta&apos;, and alpha, together with multiple sigma factors and other core-associated polypeptides such as delta, omega 1, and omega 2. We have developed an improved, large-scale purification procedure that yields RNA polymerase fractions enriched in both the sigma 28 and delta proteins. These fractions have been used to isolate sigma 28 protein for biochemical characterization and for preparation of highly specific anti-sigma 28 antisera. The amino acid composition of purified sigma 28 protein and the amino acid sequences of tryptic peptide fragments have been determined. Anti-sigma 28 antisera specifically inhibit transcription by the purified sigma 28 -dependent RNA polymerase, yet do not affect transcription by sigma 43 -dependent RNA polymerase. Immunochemical analysis confirms that the sigma 28 protein copurifies with total RNA polymerase activity through the majority of the purification procedure and allows the steps when sigma 28 protein is lost to be identified and optimized. Immunochemical techniques have also been used to monitor the structure and abundance of the sigma 28 protein in vivo. A single form of antibody-reactive protein was detected by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis-isoelectric focusing. Its abundance corresponds to a maximal content of 220 molecules of sigma 28 per B. subtilis cell during late-logarithmic-phase growth.    The E-sigma 37-transcribed gene ctc was inactivated by a site-specific insertion into the Bacillus subtilis chromosome. The resulting mutation inhibited sporulation by 95% at elevated temperatures (48 degrees C). If the ctc- mutation is placed in a strain that carries a mutation in the closely linked but distinct spoVC gene, ctc now affects both growth and sporulation at elevated temperatures. Growth of the ctc- spoVC285 strain was transiently inhibited when exponentially growing cultures were shifted from 37 degrees C to 48 degrees C. A similar, but less pronounced &quot;growth lag&quot;, was also seen in a B. subtilis strain carrying only the spoVC-285 mutation. This finding suggests that both the ctc and spoVC products function in vegetatively growing B. subtilis.    High-level resistance to macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin type B (MLS) antibiotics in Escherichia coli BM2570 is due to the presence on the conjugative plasmid pIP1527 of the MLS resistance determinant ermBC, which is almost identical to the erm genes previously described in plasmid pAM77 from Streptococcus sanguis (ermAM) and in transposon Tn917 from Enterococcus faecalis (ermB). This gene and its regulatory region are located downstream from the insertion sequence IS1. The 23S rRNA methylase encoded by pIP1527 differs by three and six amino acids from those encoded by Tn917 and pAM77, respectively. Unlike the streptococcal elements which confer the inducible MLS phenotype, the ermBC gene is expressed constitutively in E. coli and Bacillus subtilis, due to several mutations in the regulatory region. Transcription of the ermBC gene starts from three different sites following three overlapping promoters which function in both E. coli and B. subtilis. Promoters P2 and P3 are located within the region homologous to pAM77 and Tn917, and P1 is a hybrid promoter constituted by -35 and -10 sequences located at the end of IS15 and in the streptococcal region, respectively. These results constitute evidence for the recent in vivo transfer from Streptococcus spp. to E. coli. This transfer could have been mediated by transposons such as Tn917 or Tn1545 from Streptococcus pneumoniae, which also bears an MLS determinant that is homologous to ermB. We speculate that the insertion sequences IS15 and IS1 could have played a role in the expression and dissemination of ermBC, which has been found in numerous strains of enterobacteria.    Mutations that define the spoIIE locus of Bacillus subtilis block sporulation at an early stage and recently were shown to prevent the proteolytic processing of sigma E (sigma 29) into its active form, an event that is believed to control critical changes in gene expression during the second hour of development. By taking advantage of two Tn917-mediated insertional mutations in spoIIE, we have cloned DNA spanning the locus. Gene disruption experiments with subcloned fragments transferred to integrational vectors revealed that the locus consisted of a single transcription unit about 2.5 kilobase pairs in size. Transcriptional lacZ fusions were used to show that expression of this transcription unit initiated at 1.5 h after the end of log-phase growth and depended upon the products of all spo0 loci. Expression was directed by a single promoter whose position was determined by high-resolution S1 protection mapping. A deletion analysis of the promoter region was also carried out, with novel integrational vectors based on derivatives of coliphage M13. The results indicated that a region of DNA extending from 183 to 118 base pairs upstream from the start point of transcription was required for full activity of the spoIIE promoter. The presumptive RNA polymerase-binding region of the promoter exhibited striking similarity to the spoIIG promoter and featured perfect but unusually spaced -10 and -35 consensus sequences for sigma A (sigma 43)-associated RNA polymerase.    The regulation of the expression of the operons in the flagella-chemotaxis regulon in Escherichia coli has been shown to be a highly ordered cascade which closely parallels the assembly of the flagellar structure and the chemotaxis machinery (T. Iino, Annu. Rev. Genet. 11:161-182, 1977; Y. Komeda, J. Bacteriol. 168: 1315-1318). The master operon, flbB, has been sequenced, and one of its gene products (FlaI) has been identified. On the basis of the deduced amino acid sequence, the FlbB protein has similarity to an alternate sigma factor which is responsible for expression of flagella in Bacillus subtilis. In addition, we have sequenced the 5&apos; regions of a number of flagellar operons and compared these sequences with the 5&apos; region of flagellar operons directly and indirectly under FlbB and FlaI control. We found both a consensus sequence which has been shown to be in all other flagellar operons (J. D. Helmann and M. J. Chamberlin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 84:6422-6424) and a derivative consensus sequence, which is found only in the 5&apos; region of operons directly under FlbB and FlaI control.    Bacillus subtilis contains multiple forms of RNA polymerase holoenzyme, distinguished by the presence of different specificity determinants known as sigma factors. The sigma 28 factor was initially purified as a unique transcriptional activity in vegetatively growing B. subtilis cells. Purification of the sigma 28 protein has allowed tryptic peptides to be prepared and sequenced. The sequence of one tryptic peptide fragment was used to prepare an oligonucleotide probe specific for the sigma 28 structural gene, and the gene was isolated from a B. subtilis subgenomic library. The complete nucleotide sequence of the sigma 28 gene was determined, and the cloned sigma 28 gene was used to construct a mutant strain which does not express the sigma 28 protein. This strain also failed to synthesize flagellin protein and grew as long filaments. The predicted sigma 28 gene product is a 254-amino-acid polypeptide with a calculated molecular weight of 29,500. The sigma 28 protein sequence was similar to that of other sequenced sigma factors and to the flbB gene product of Escherichia coli. Since the flbB gene product is a positive regulator of flagellar synthesis in E. coli, it is likely that sigma 28 functions to regulate flagellar synthesis in B. subtilis.    A detailed physical and functional map of the chloramphenicol (Cm) resistance plasmid pC223 from Staphylococcus aureus was compiled. The plasmid&apos;s basic replicon and origin of replication were located and their nucleotide sequences determined. Two small RNAs of 92 and 155 nt, demonstrated by in vitro transcription with vegetative Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase, were depicted as copy number regulating (cop) and incompatibility (inc) functions in Bacillus subtilis. pC223 and pUB112, another S. aureus Cm resistance plasmid, which exhibits marked sequence homology with pC223 and codes also for two small copRNAs, could be classified as members of the pT181-plasmid family (1). Copy numbers and segregational instability of pC223, pUB112 and deletion derivatives of both in B. subtilis showed great differences despite of their homologous basic replicons.    Sporulation of Bacillus subtilis is a primitive example of coupling between morphological changes and timing of gene expression during development. A major early control of transcriptional activity is dependent on a new sigma factor, sigma E, which is encoded by the sigE gene and synthesized as an inactive precursor, pro-sigma E. We show that mutations in the spoIIGA gene block the processing of pro-sigma E. Moreover, synthesis of both spoIIGA and sigE products in vegetative cells leads to expression of a sigma E-controlled promoter during growth, suggesting that SpoIIGA has pro-sigma E processing activity. The SpoIIGA polypeptide, which contains five potential transmembrane domains, is synthesized during sporulation 1 hr before processing activity can be detected. We propose that SpoIIGA processing activity is triggered by the presence of the sporulation septum, which is itself dependent on the spoIIAA and spoIIE products. These proteins are normally needed for pro-sigma E processing during sporulation but can be bypassed in vegetative cells. According to this model, a morphological structure would directly control the synthesis of a developmental sigma factor and would modify gene expression.    The DNA sequences of the spo0H genes from Bacillus licheniformis and B. subtilis are described, and the predicted open reading frames code for proteins of 26,097 and 25,447 daltons, respectively. The two spo0H gene products are 91% identical to one another and about 25% identical to most of the procaryotic sigma factors. The predicted proteins have a conserved 14-amino-acid sequence at their amino terminal end, typical of sigma factors. Antibodies raised against the spo0H gene product of B. licheniformis specifically react with RNA polymerase sigma factor protein, sigma 30, purified from B. subtilis. We conclude that the spo0H genes of B. licheniformis and B. subtilis code for sigma 30, now known as sigma H.    The construction of a shuttle vector for inducible gene expression allowing fast and easy cloning in Escherichia coli and subsequent transformation of Bacillus subtilis is presented. The expression is based on the regulation of the tac promoter by the Lac repressor which was assayed with the xylE gene from Pseudomonas putida as a marker gene. The lacIq gene, transcribed by the strong spo promoter, allowed full repression of the weak tac promoter.    The Bacillus subtilis phage phi 105 repressor specifically recognizes a 14-bp operator sequence which does not exhibit 2-fold rotational symmetry. To facilitate a genetic analysis of this sequence-dependent DNA binding a B. subtilis strain was constructed in which mutations affecting the phi 105 repressor-operator interaction cause a selectable phenotype, chloramphenicol resistance. After in vivo mutagenesis, we isolated and mapped 22 different mutations in the repressor coding sequence, 15 of which are missense substitutions. These are exclusively located in the N-terminal part (positions 1-43) of the 144 residue long polypeptide. Two nonsense mutants, at positions 70 and 89, respectively, still show partial repressor activity. These data suggest that the phi 105 repressor consists of at least two independently folding structural domains, of which the N-terminal is involved in operator binding. Twelve missense mutations are clustered in a region extending from Gln-18 to Arg-37, which we propose to be the DNA-binding alpha-helix--beta-turn--alpha-helix motif, common to all lambda Cro-like repressors. The second (&apos;recognition&apos;) helix shows significant homology with the corresponding sequence in Tn3 resolvase, and there is also a striking similarity between the phi 105 operator and the consensus sequence for a Tn3 res half-site. Based on these observations, and on the previously isolated phi 105 0c mutants, we tentatively assign some specific contacts between base pairs from the first half of a phi 105 operator site and amino acids from the repressor&apos;s &apos;recognition helix&apos;.    The level of fumarase activity in Bacillus subtilis depends on the nutritional environment; in rich medium low vegetative levels increase towards the end of the exponential phase, whereas in minimal glucose medium levels are relatively high throughout growth. Analysis of the enzyme levels in spoO mutants has revealed that a functional spoOH gene is required for the efficient expression of fumarase in both media. This highlights a regulatory role for the spoOH gene product not only in control of postexponentially expressed genes, but also during vegetative growth in defined medium. S1 transcript mapping reveals three transcriptional startpoints for the fumarase structural gene (citG) in B. subtilis. The upstream promoter region P1, which appears to contain two transcriptional startpoints, is functional in both Escherichia coli and B. subtilis. Promoter P2, which is located closer to the structural gene, is only functional in B. subtilis. Transcription from this promoter is strictly dependent on a functional spoOH gene; this gene has recently been shown to encode a minor sigma factor.    A novel hybridization test for quantification of mRNA from bacterial cells lysed directly in the culture medium was developed and optimized. The method uses two adjacent probes from a DNA fragment of interest in a sandwich hybridization. An unlabeled probe is immobilized on a solid support to capture homologous nucleic acids in the test solution. Hybrid detection is performed with the other, labeled, probe, which can bind to the filter only as a sample-mediated hybrid. We used the Bacillus amyloliquefaciens alpha-amylase gene and its mRNA as models for characterizing gene expression in Bacillus subtilis. To confirm the specificity of mRNA hybridization, nondenatured nucleic acid samples were allowed to react simultaneously with two filters: the mRNA-specific filter containing anti-sense single-stranded DNA and the background filter containing single-stranded DNA of the mRNA sense, respectively. We also developed a rapid enzymatic lysis procedure for B. subtilis, allowing complete degradation of late stationary phase cells grown in rich culture medium, while retaining mRNA molecules of high integrity. The applicability of this rapid lysis procedure and the hybridization method for mRNA analyses in long-term fermentations was demonstrated.    The spoIIIC locus of Bacillus subtilis has been cloned from the lambda library of Ferrari et al. (E. Ferrari, D. J. HEnner, and J. A. Hoch, J. Bacteriol. 146:430-432, 1981) by using as an assay transformation of the mutant allele spoIIIC94 to the wild type. Regulation of the spoIIIC locus was studied by hybridization of cloned spoIIIC DNA to RNA pulse-labeled at various times during growth and sporulation. The relative rate of transcription of the spoIIIC locus was highest 3 h after the end of growth. The DNA sequence of the spoIIIC transcription unit indicated the coding capacity for a small protein (138 amino acids) having significant similarity with one domain of RNA polymerase sigma factors. Interruption of this coding sequence by an insertion mutation caused cells to become Spo-.    Transcription from the Bacillus subtilis ctc promoter is induced as cells enter stationary phase under conditions in which the enzymes of the tricarboxylic acid cycle are repressed. This transcription requires the presence of a secondary form of RNA polymerase, E sigma B, that is found in exponentially growing cells and in early-stationary-phase cells. Starting with a defective ctc promoter that had either a base substitution at position -15 or a base substitution at position -36, we were able to identify four independent second-site mutations within these mutated promoters that suppressed the effect of the original mutations and thereby restored function to the ctc promoter. Three of these mutated promoters had an additional base substitution(s) at positions -5, -9, or both -5 and -9 that enhanced their utilization in vivo by E sigma B, whereas one of the promoters had a single-base-pair deletion in the -15 region that placed it under a completely different form of regulation than that of the wild-type ctc promoter. In addition to mutations in the ctc promoter region, we also isolated three classes of mutants that exhibited increased ctc expression. The effects of the mutations in these strains were not allele specific, since they increased expression from both mutant and wild-type ctc promoters. One class of mutants which affected expression from the ctc promoter carried mutations that blocked the activity of the tricarboxylic acid cycle. A second class of mutations mapped near cysA and was unable to sporulate. Three-factor transformation crosses and complementation analysis indicated that one of these mutations was an allele of spo0H.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    The spoVH locus, involved in the sporulation of Bacillus subtilis, was cloned in derivatives of the temperate bacteriophage luminal diameter 105. Two recombinant phages were obtained which contained 4.2 kilobases of chromosomal DNA. Both phages only partially complemented a mutation in the spoVH operon, spoVH516. Nevertheless, analysis of the cloned locus with integrational plasmids showed that the complete operon had been cloned. A spoVH&apos;-lacZ transcriptional fusion was constructed, and this indicated that the spoVH operon was expressed 2.25 h after the start of sporulation. The distribution of beta-galactosidase in sporulating cells containing a spoVH&apos;-lacZ fusion showed that spoVH was expressed in the spore compartment; lac fusion experiments were also used to study spoVH expression in the presence of other sporulation mutations. Expression of spoVH was prevented by mutations in any of the stage 0 or stage II loci and also by mutations in spoIIIA, spoIIIB, and spoIIIE. A similar pattern of dependence was found previously for the expression of spoVA, which is also expressed in the spore compartment.    Two homologous genes encoding 130-kilodalton (kDa) mosquitocidal proteins of Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis have been cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli or Bacillus subtilis or both. One of these genes, pPC130, was expressed as a lacZ transcriptional fusion in E. coli at a level sufficient to produce phase-bright inclusions, which were purified and shown to be toxic to Aedes aegypti larvae. The second gene, pCH130, was expressed at a low level in recombinant E. coli cells and was therefore cloned in B. subtilis as a transcriptional fusion of the promoter sequences corresponding to a B. thuringiensis subsp. israelensis 27-kDa delta-endotoxin (E. S. Ward, A. R. Ridley, D. J. Ellar, and J. A. Todd, J. Mol. Biol. 191:13-22, 1986) and the structural gene. Recombinant B. subtilis cells produced phase-bright inclusions during late sporulation; these were partially purified and shown to be toxic to A. aegypti larvae at an LC50 (concentration required to cause 50% mortality of larvae after 24 h of assay) which is significantly lower than that of the pPC130 protein. Neither 130-kDa protein was hemolytic under the assay conditions. Comparison of the nucleotide sequences of these two genes indicates that they share a high degree of homology in the C-terminal portions, but relatively little similarity in the N termini. In addition, significant homologies were found between the pCH130 gene and the HD-1 Dipel gene of B. thuringiensis subsp. kurstaki (H. E. Schnepf, H. C. Wong, and H. R. Whiteley, J. Biol. Chem. 260:6264-6272, 1985).    We measured the synthesis of dipicolinic acid (DPA) during sporulation in spo mutants of Bacillus subtilis by a sensitive biological assay based on cross-feeding of a spoVF mutant strain and also chemically. Many spo mutations, including several that block sporulation at stage III, did not prevent synthesis of DPA but instead prevented its incorporation into the spore. In general, strains with mutations in loci that are expressed in the spore compartment synthesized DPA, whereas strains with mutations in most of the loci that are expressed in the mother-cell compartment did not. Transcription of the gerE gene, as measured by DNA-RNA hybridization, followed a dependence pattern very similar to that of DPA synthesis. However, the dependence patterns of the two operons show that at about stage IV of sporulation there is a branch in the sequence of operon expression in the mother cell. One branch leads through spoVC to synthesis of DPA synthetase, and the other leads through spoVD to expression of gerE.    A sporulation-specific sigma factor of Bacillus subtilis (sigma E) is formed by a proteolytic activation of a precursor protein (P31). Synthesis of the precursor protein is shown to be abolished in B. subtilis mutants with plasmid insertions as far as 940 base pairs upstream of the P31 structural gene (sigE), and processing of P31 to sigma E is blocked by a deletion in this upstream region. These results substantiate the view that sigE is the distal member of a 2-gene operon and demonstrate that the upstream gene (spoIIGA) is necessary for sigma E formation.    Induction of beta-lactamase (blaP) in Bacillus licheniformis involves the regulatory genes blaI (repressor), blaR1 (coinducer) and R2 (function unknown). Transcription of the bla genes during induction was followed by Northern hybridization. In the first 30 min 2.3-kb transcripts encoding blaI and blaR1 were present. Subsequently, blaP mRNA and short transcripts encoding only blaI accumulated and reached a peak at 1 h. All bla transcripts turn over rapidly. Active repressor is not required for the burst of blaI-blaR1 mRNA. The production of blaI-blaR1 mRNA, and thus of BlaR1, is probably controlled both at initiation of transcription and at a later step in its synthesis and degradation.    Secondary structure models for the ribonuclease (RNAase) P RNAs of Bacillus subtilis and E. coli were derived by a phylogenetic comparative analysis of published sequences as well as four novel ones. The RNAase P RNA genes from Bacillus megaterium, Bacillus brevis, Bacillus stearothermophilus, and Pseudomonas fluorescens were cloned, sequenced, and compared with the other available sequences. Regions of pairing were identified by the occurrence of homologous complementary sequences that vary among the compared molecules. A common core of primary and secondary structure can be identified in all these RNAase P RNAs. The previously noted striking differences between the Bacillus and the enteric RNAase P RNAs arise not only from point mutations, but from the addition or deletion of structural domains. The primary and secondary structural features that are common to all of the RNAase P RNAs are likely to be the elements involved in the binding and cleavage of tRNA precursors, and in the interaction with the RNAase P protein.    The human gene for mature interferon-alpha 1 (IFN-alpha 1) was inserted in a new transcription-translation fusion vector system based on the expression and secretion signals of the gene for type A streptococcal pyrogenic exotoxin, speA. As deduced from the known nucleotide sequences of the component elements, the encoded IFN-alpha 1 was a fusion protein carrying an N-terminal extension of 17 amino acids. When inserted in appropriate vectors capable of replication in Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis and Streptococcus sanguis, this expression configuration directed the synthesis of antiviral activity in all 3 organisms, as judged by the cythopathic effect inhibition assay of Vesicular Stomatitis Virus. In E. coli JM101, IFN activity was found mainly in the cytoplasmic protein fraction whereas in the gram-positive hosts, it was completely secreted into the culture medium.    Nuclease S1 mapping was used to identify the transcription start points of the spoIIA and spoVA operons of Bacillus subtilis. The spoIIA operon has been shown to be transcribed from two promoters separated by about 850 bp of DNA. The downstream of the two promoters has -10 and -35 regions characteristic of promoters recognised by the sigma-B form of RNA polymerase and it gives rise to a transcript with a 45-base 5&apos; untranslated leader sequence. Studies on the upstream spoIIA promoter are still in progress and preliminary results indicate the presence of an open reading frame between the two promoters. In the case of the spoVA operon the promoter shows homology to promoters recognised by the sigma-E form of RNA polymerase; the 5&apos; untranslated sequence on the spoVA mRNA is 14 bases.    Expression of the major intracellular serine protease (ISP-1) gene of Bacillus subtilis was studied by using a translational fusion plasmid in which the isp promoter region was fused to the lacZ gene. beta-Galactosidase activity, used to measure transcription from the isp promoter, was produced immediately after the end of exponential growth, whereas intracellular protease activity was not detected until 4 h later. These results are consistent with a previous suggestion that ISP-1 initially accumulates in the cell in an enzymatically inactive form. ISP-1 activity was detected in all of the sporulation-deficient strains examined, and the amount of protease activity always corresponded to the amount of beta-galactosidase activity. These results indicate that the activation of ISP-1 is not dependent on a sporulation-specific gene product. Expression of ISP-1 is regulated by a number of mutations known to affect the expression of extracellular enzymes. In sacU(h) and sacQ(h) mutants, the expression of ISP-1 was 10-fold higher than in the wild-type strain. In catA, hpr, and scoC strains, expression of ISP was stimulated two- to threefold, whereas in sacU mutants the expression of ISP-1 was reduced to less than 10% of the wild-type level. The temporal expression and activation of ISP-1 was not affected by any of these mutations. This is the first evidence that the expression of a native intracellular protein is affected by these hyperproduction mutations.    The anticancer drug netropsin increases the synthesis of an exocellular metalloproteinase during exponential growth as well as in the stationary phase of a sporulating strain of Bacillus megaterium. Its effect is due to a stimulation of the synthesis of the mRNA coding for the proteinase, determined as a residual synthesis of the enzyme in the presence of actinomycin D. The half-life of the proteinase mRNA (5-6 min at 35 degrees C) is not affected by netropsin. Netropsin relieves partially the repression of the proteinase mRNA caused by amino acids, whereas the repression brought about by an increased temperature is almost unaffected by the drug.    A number of mutations have been described with pleiotropic effects on the expression of genes for degradative enzymes in Bacillus subtilis. The sacU32(Hy) and sacQ36(Hy) mutations increase the expression of a wide variety of enzymes that degrade biological polymers. The phenotypes caused by mutations at the hpr locus are more restricted; they are known to increase expression of the alkaline and neutral proteases. The alkaline protease (aprE) promoter was analyzed to determine the target site for stimulation by these loci. Deletion of upstream regions of the aprE promoter could abolish or greatly reduce stimulation by mutations at these loci. A region upstream of -200 was necessary for full stimulation by an hpr-97 mutation, whereas a region between -141 and -164 was necessary for full stimulation by the sacU32(Hy) and sacQ36(Hy) mutations. Northern analyses of mRNA preparations showed that the levels of aprE mRNA were increased in strains carrying the sacU32(Hy) or hpr-97 mutation. Moreover, primer extension analysis of these mRNA preparations revealed that the transcription start point was identical to that in a wild-type strain. We hypothesize that upstream activation of the subtilisin promoter mediated by these genes is a mechanism for global responses to a variety of nutritional conditions.    The start point for transcription of the subtilisin (aprE) gene was determined by primer extension analysis and was found to be at a point significantly different from that identified in a previously published report (S. L. Wong, C. W. Price, D. S. Goldfarb, and R. H. Doi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81:1184-1188, 1984). An aprE-lacZ fusion was used to analyze expression of the promoter. Deletion analyses of the promoter were performed to determine the extent of the upstream region necessary for activity. This was found to be between -52 and -41 with respect to the transcription start site. Expression of the aprE-lacZ fusion was unimpaired in a mutant deleted for the sigma B subunit of RNA polymerase. Mutations in the gene for the sigma H subunit of RNA polymerase decreased expression of the aprE-lacZ fusion to approximately 25% of that of the wild type. These results leave the identity of the sigma factor responsible for transcription of this gene in question. Mutations in the spo0A gene drastically decreased the activity of the aprE promoter and its upstream deletion derivatives, while the abrB gene, a phenotypic suppressor of spo0 mutations, restored activity of the aprE promoter in all of the deletion derivatives. Thus, inhibition of transcription by the spo0A mutation and its restoration by an abrB mutation could not be separated from the promoter of the aprE gene.    The amyR1 locus controls the regulated transcription of amyE, the structural gene encoding alpha-amylase in Bacillus subtilis. Transcription of amyE is activated in early stationary phase cells, and can be repressed by rapidly metabolized carbon sources such as glucose. Transcription of amyE initiates in vitro from a promoter recognized by the major vegetative form of RNA polymerase, E sigma 43. S1 nuclease mapping of in-vivo amylase transcripts suggests that this promoter is also used in vivo. Two independently isolated cis-acting mutations, gra-5 and gra-10, which abolish glucose-mediated repression of amylase synthesis without altering temporal activation, were determined by DNA sequencing to result from a G.C to A.T transition at a position located five base-pairs downstream from the start site of transcription. While this is the first example of a site involved in catabolite repression of gene expression in a Gram-positive micro-organism, the region surrounding the gra mutations shows considerable homology to certain cis-acting regulatory loci in Escherichia coli, suggesting that such sequences have been evolutionarily conserved.    Initiation of RNA synthesis by Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase (sigma-43) has been examined at two early promoters of phage phi 29: the A2 promoter, which is a weak promoter, and the G2 promoter, which is a strong promoter. The delta subunit of the polymerase inhibits the rate of initiation at A2, but not G2. In addition, formation of stable complexes by the polymerase at A2, but not at G2, requires the presence of the first two nucleotides of the A2 transcript.    By deletion analysis we have defined a 1.1 kb segment required for driving autonomous replication of the plasmid pC194. The minimal replicon specifies a positive, RepH, and a negative, Inc8A, trans-acting product and their target sites. The RepH product has a Mr of 34.1 kDa, could be overproduced, and binds specifically to the pC194 origin region. By trans complementation studies we have shown that pC194 replication is indirectly controlled at the level of RepH synthesis by a negative product, IncA, that is transcribed within the repH transcription unit in the opposite direction (&quot;antisense RNA&quot;). The antisense RNA regulates the RepH synthesis by a mechanism that seems to involve RNA/RNA interaction in a manner that interferes with translation. In addition, an autoregulatory control might be operative.    A strong transcriptional signal previously cloned from the Streptomyces griseus genome in S. lividans was subcloned and its nucleotide sequence was determined. Upstream of the transcriptional start point which was determined by high-resolution S1 nuclease mapping, -35 (5&apos;-TTGCCG-3&apos;) and -10 (5&apos;-TAGCGT-3&apos;) sequences, separated by 18 nucleotides, were present. By replacing the tet promoter of pBR322 with the Streptomyces promoter, no expression of the tet gene was observed in Escherichia coli cells. The result suggests that notwithstanding a similarity to the E. coli -35 and -10 sequences, the Streptomyces promoter is not functional in E. coli. The strong promoter was inserted in multi-copy and wide host range plasmids pIJ702 and pKS11, resulting in the pSEV series of expression-vectors with several unique restriction endonuclease cleavage sites downstream of the promoter for cloning of foreign genes. The extremely heat-stable malate dehydrogenase of Thermus flavus, when its coding sequence with a ribosome-binding site was located downstream of the strong promoter in pSEV2, was produced in large quantities in S. lividans throughout growth. When an extracellular cellulase from Bacillus subtilis was expressed in a cellulase-negative S. lividans strain, virtually all of the cellulase activity was found in the culture supernatant.    A transposon Tn917 insertion between gerE and ilvB has identified a new developmental locus, gerM, in Bacillus subtilis. gerM96::Tn917 affects both sporulation and germination. DNA on either side of the transposon has been cloned and includes the previously cloned sdhC and gerE loci. gerE terminates 2.1 kb from the end of the transposon. The gerM96::Tn917 mutant is oligosporogenous, yielding approximately 1% of the number of wild-type heat resistant spores in liquid medium and 10% on solid medium. Six hours after the onset of sporulation alkaline phosphatase and glucose dehydrogenase levels were 90% and 7%, respectively, of those of the wild-type. At this time 50% of the mutant cells were still dividing. The occurrence of multiple polar septa and &apos;pygmy&apos; cells suggested a block at stage II of sporulation. Following addition of germinants, mutant spores prepared on nutrient agar lost heat resistance normally but released slightly less dipicolinic acid than wild-type spores. They also showed only partial loss of optical density, associated with a phase-grey appearance and striations in the cortex suggesting partial degradation. Expression of the gerM gene was monitored by production of beta-galactosidase encoded by a promotorless lacZ gene fused to the gerM96::Tn917 insertion. It occurred 1.5-4 h after commencement of sporulation. Transcription was directed from a promoter on the gerE side of gerM and was unaffected by a mutation in the gerE gene.    Mutations that cause sporulation defects (spo mutations) often identify developmentally regulated transcription units or genes whose products are required for the expression of sporulation-specific regulons. We report here the isolation, genetic analysis and phenotypic characterization of spo mutations produced by insertional mutagenesis with transposon Tn917, a form of mutagenesis that facilitates genetic and physical manipulation of mutated genes in many ways. Twenty-four insertional spo mutations were studied in detail. On the basis of transformation-mediated and transduction-mediated linkage analysis and a range of phenotypic tests, these mutations were assigned to 20 distinct loci, at least 9 of which are different from the 40 previously described spo loci. The insertional mutations caused blocks at a variety of different stages of sporulation, and therefore probably identify genes active at different times during sporulation. In addition to increasing substantially the total of known spo loci, we anticipate that this collection will include representatives of many of the temporally regulated sets of genes that comprise the overall program of sporulation-specific gene activation in Bacillus subtilis. Given the kinds of manipulations that are possible with genes disrupted by Tn917 insertions, this should significantly facilitate efforts to understand the regulation of these gene sets.    The sigma-subunit of RNA polymerase is responsible for promoter recognition in prokaryotes [(1969) Nature 221, 43-46]. Alterations in the sigma-subunit are thought to be involved in controlling &apos;global&apos; changes in gene expression, such as those involved in differentiation in the spore-forming bacterium Bacillus subtilis [(1981) Cell 25, 582-584]. Stragier et al. [(1985) FEBS Lett. 195, 3-11] have proposed that sigma-factors are composed of two domains: a C-terminal domain involved in promoter recognition and an N-terminal domain involved in interactions with RNA polymerase. We have sequenced another developmental gene from B. subtilis, spoIIIC, and the strong homology of its predicted product suggests that it too may be a sigma-factor. However, the spoIIIC product is small and lacks completely the conserved N-terminal domain of the sigma-subunits. I propose that the product of the spoIIIC gene may carry out the DNA-recognition functions of a sigma-factor but that it probably requires an auxiliary factor to interact with core RNA polymerase.    The phenotype of a recently-described mutant (OV6), conditionally defective in chromosome partitioning and septal positioning, was originally thought to be due to a new gene (parD) mapping at 88.4 min. We have now shown that, in addition to the parD mutation, OV6 carries a gyrAam mutation and that this mutation is probably responsible for the gross phenotype of the mutant. We have cloned the gyrA gene, identified the GyrA protein, sequenced the gyrA gene and flanking genes, cloned and sequenced the gyrAam mutation, and identified its truncated product. In addition, we have identified the transcriptional start point of the gyrA gene. The E. coli GyrA protein has extensive homologies with Gyrase proteins of other organisms and weak sequence homologies with some eukaryotic cytoskeletal proteins.    The role of plasmids in regulation of delta-endotoxin synthesis by Bacillus thuringiensis H14 was studied. The derivatives of strain Is-1 H14 containing a 4Md plasmid integrated into the chromosome synthesize small crystals and are not toxic for the gnat larvae. The transceptional transfer into this strain of a plasmid coding for crystal synthesis from the strain 69-6 serotype H5 results in restoration of insecticidal activity to the level of the parental strain Is-1. Transcipients activity is increased 10-15 fold in case of 4Md plasmid excision from the chromosome and autonomous functioning. Evidently, 4Md plasmid from the strain Is-1 as well as a plasmid coding for crystal synthesis from the strain 69-6 contains the regulatory elements participating in the expression of crystalline protein genes localized on other plasmids. The existence of two cellular regulatory groups is supposed to result in the significant increase in crystalline protein synthesis.    The phage phi 29 protein p4, that controls viral late transcription, was highly purified from Escherichia coli cells harbouring a gene 4-containing plasmid. This protein, representing about 6% of the total cellular protein, was obtained in a highly purified form. The protein was characterized as p4 by amino acid analysis and NH2-terminal sequence determination. The purified protein was active in an in vitro transcription assay, allowing specific initiation of transcription at the phi 29 A3 late promoter in the presence of Bacillus subtilis sigma 43-RNA polymerase holoenzyme.    The Escherichia coli lacUV5 promoter is used inefficiently by the major vegetative form of Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase, despite very close adherence in the -35 and -10 regions to consensus sequences for promoters recognized by this enzyme. To select derivatives of this promoter with increased activity in B. subtilis, the lacUV5 promoter was fused to a promoter-less chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene and mutagenized by passage through an E. coli mutD5 mutator strain. Derivatives that conferred resistance to chloramphenicol in B. subtilis were isolated. Twenty-three independent isolates each contained single mutations in the 207 bp lac fragment. These mutations, which were in ten different positions, fell in two clusters. One set of mutations, located between positions -18 and -14, resulted in greater homology to a consensus sequence previously noted for this region in B. subtilis vegetative promoters. The remaining mutations were located near the transcription initiation site. The effects of these mutations and additional mutations constructed by oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis on expression in B. subtilis and E. coli was determined by measurements of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase activities directed by these promoters. While most mutations had little effect on expression in E. coli, the increase in activity in B. subtilis was as much as 28-fold.    The lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) gene of a mesophilic bacterium, Bacillus megaterium (DSM 090), was cloned in E. coli HB 101 using a pEMBL vector and synthetic oligonucleotide probes. The gene was strongly expressed in the vector used if the orientation of the insert allowed the LDH promoter and the vector&apos;s lac promoter to direct transcription in the same direction. The gene and its 5&apos; and 3&apos; flanking regions have been sequenced. Codon usage patterns of LDH genes from mesophilic and thermophilic bacilli were compared and found to be characteristically different. A hybrid gene was constructed from fragments of the LDH genes from B. stearothermophilus (coding for aa 15-100) and B. megaterium (coding for aa 101-331). The hybrid LDH, named S100M, was more thermostable than B. megaterium LDH, less thermostabile than B. stearothermophilus LDH and unlike the two wildtype enzymes, it could not be activated by Fru-P2.    The role of monocytes in cell-mediated cytolysis of bladder cancer cells was investigated. Human peripheral monocytes released a cytolytic factor which lysed T24 bladder cancer cells and a number of human tumor cells, but not normal lymphocytes or fibroblasts. After incubation of monocytes with bacillus Calmette-Guerin for 48 hr. in vitro, cytolysis of T24 cells was increased up to 56.7 +/- 4.1%. Treatment of monocytes with actinomycin D (an inhibitor of RNA transcription) reduced release of cytolytic factor from 27.3 +/- 5.7% cytolysis to 4.5 +/- 1.4% (p less than 0.05). The response to mitomycin C was different between lymphokines and monocyte cytolytic factor. The mouse monoclonal antibody against human recombinant tumor necrosis factor did not neutralize monocyte cytolytic factor. These results show that this monocyte cytolytic factor is distinct from lymphokines and tumor necrosis factor. The evidence that bacillus Calmette-Guerin increases release of monocyte cytolytic factor may be associated with anti-tumor activity of bacillus Calmette-Guerin in intravesical therapy for treatment of bladder cancer.    The possibility of homologous and heterologous transception of Cry+ plasmids in Bacillus thuringiensis is demonstrated. Cry+ plasmids from crystal bearing strain of Bacillus thuringiensis were transferred into acrystalline strain belonging to H5 serotype by mutual incubation. The donor strain was previously marked by the transmissive plasmid pAM beta 1 coding for erythromycin and lincomycin resistance. The transcipients having acquired the ability to synthesize delta-endotoxin were referred to H5 serotype due to their phenotype. By analogous method Cry+ plasmid was transferred from Bacillus thuringiensis to Bacillus cereus. Bacillus cereus strain GP7 was used as a recipient strain resistant to tetracycline. The presence of delta-endotoxin in transcipients was confirmed by bioprobes and immunoenzyme assay. To prove the transfer of Cry+ plasmid the plasmid profiles of the parent strains and transcipients have been analyzed. The formation of cellular contacts during mutual incubation of Bacillus thuringiensis and Bacillus cereus strains was demonstrated by electron microscopic study of ultrafine cuts.    By cloning MboI fragments in the promoter selection vector pGKV210, which replicates in Streptococcus lactis, Bacillus subtilis, and Escherichia coli and carries a promoterless chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene, we obtained a number of fragments endowed with promoter activity, partly by direct selection for chloramphenicol resistance in S. lactis IL1403 and partly by selection in B. subtilis. Five fragments were sequenced, and the promoters were mapped with S1 nuclease. The promoters agreed with the E. coli promoter consensus and the B. subtilis vegetative sigma 43 promoter consensus. The promoters were preceded by an A + T-rich region (ranging from 64 to 78% A + T). S1 nuclease mapping data showed that the transcriptional start point in three of the fragments was at a TAG sequence 5 to 9 nucleotides downstream from the promoter. Three fragments carried an open reading frame preceded by a ribosome-binding site which can be recognized by E. coli, B. subtilis, and S. lactis ribosomes.    pE194, a 3.7-kilobase plasmid, confers resistance to macrolide, lincosamide, and streptogramin B antibiotics. The previously identified cop and repF genes of pE194 have been further localized by molecular cloning and mutational analysis together with DNA sequencing. The CfoIB fragment of pE194 is capable of autonomous replication and contains both genes. Most of this region has been resequenced, and two errors reported in a previous study have been corrected. The corrected sequence indicates that the replication region contains a single large open reading frame, which we propose encodes the repF product. Northern blot (RNA blot) analysis of this region detected six transcripts, all transcribed in the same direction as one another and opposite to repF. A 350-base transcript is synthesized from the region containing cop. No in vivo transcript for the repF gene was detected, but a protein was observed in an in vitro transcription-translation system which appears to be its product. An ochre mutation was inserted in the putative repF open reading frame, and a nonsense fragment was detected in the in vitro system. When carried passively on a pUB110 replicon, this mutant product appears capable of inhibiting pE194 replicons in trans. The pE194 origin of replication has been localized to within 200 bases.    We present the first evidence, in Bacillus subtilis, for gene regulation through the classical mechanism of repressor-operator interaction. The EcoRI-F immunity region (immF) of lysogenic phage phi 105 contains two promoters, PM and PR, in divergent orientations. PM initiates transcription of the phi 105 repressor (c phi 105) gene, whereas PR most probably signals the onset of the lytic pathway. Fusions between each of these promoters and the cat-86 gene were constructed, and in-vivo promoter activities were determined, in both the presence and absence of the functional c phi 105 product, using S1 nuclease analysis and chloramphenicol acetyl transferase assays. The results showed that transcription from PM is stimulated, whereas PR activity is negatively controlled by the repressor. This differential regulation appears to be mediated by recognition of a 14 base-pair (bp) sequence, 5&apos; GACGGAAATACAAG 3&apos;, three identical copies of which are present as direct repeats. Two copies, OR1 and OR2, are located closely together in the non-transcribed region between PM and PR, but do not overlap with the -35 and -10 regions of these promoters. The third copy, OR3, is located some 250 bp downstream from PR, within the coding region (ORF3) of the proximal gene of the PR transcription unit. When a 231 bp restriction fragment containing only OR3 was inserted between a strong constitutive promoter (P138) and the cat-86 gene, the in-vivo expression of chloramphenicol resistance was considerably reduced in the presence, but not in the absence, of phi 105 repressor. This hybrid P138-OR-cat-86 construct was subsequently used to select in vivo for operator-constitutive (Oc) mutations. Of 25 Oc mutants analyzed, all showed base alterations or deletions affecting the 14 bp sequence. We show further that insertion of a chemically synthesized oligonucleotide, containing the 14 bp OR sequence, at a site more than 100 bp downstream from the constitutive P138 is sufficient for transcription to become negatively controlled by phi 105 repressor. In comparison with previously identified Gram-negative bacterial and phage operators, the most unusual aspect of the phi 105 OR sequence appears to be its complete lack of 2-fold rotational symmetry.    Biosynthesis of bacterial flagella involves the coordinated expression of 30 or more genes in several separate operons. We have recently shown that in Bacillus subtilis, the sigma 28 factor is essential for flagellar synthesis, suggesting that transcription of these genes is directly under the control of this alternative sigma factor. In enteric bacteria structural genes for flagellar, chemotaxis, and motility operons appear to be under coordinate control, however, the nature of the regulatory factors has not been determined. Sequence analysis of many such genes has failed to reveal plausible promoter sequences for the predominant bacterial RNA polymerase, and several such genes are not transcribed effectively in vitro by the Escherichia coli sigma 70 RNA polymerase. However, all of the sequenced flagellar, chemotaxis, and motility operons from the enteric bacteria are preceded by DNA sequences highly homologous to B. subtilis sigma 28 promoters. We propose that an alternative sigma factor controls expression of the flagellar regulon in both B. subtilis and in the enteric bacteria.    A mutation, spo-87, in the spo0J locus of Bacillus subtilis allows appreciable transcription of spoIIA, spoIID and spoIIG and later operons, even though most of the cells are morphologically blocked at stage 0 and the incidence of heat-resistant spores is about 1 per 10(4) cells. This mutation therefore appears to disengage the genetic control of sporulation from the morphological changes to which it should be connected. spoIIA and spoIIG are transcribed independently of one another. However, the products of both operons are needed for the activation of spoIID which occurs later. This indicates a convergence of parallel pathways of operon expression. We have also shown that nonsense mutations in spoIIAC (which codes for a sigma factor of RNA polymerase) prevent transcription of spoIID; by contrast, missense mutations in the same gene allow transcription of spoIID.    A fragment of Bacillus subtilis DNA 3490 bp long, capable of complementing spoIIIE mutations, was sequenced. The region of the fragment that encodes functions required for sporulation was delimited using integrational plasmids. Sequencing showed that this region contained an operon with two open reading frames together with associated ribosome-binding sites. The deduced translation products would be polypeptides of 518 and 252 amino acid residues. Several sequences resembling promoters recognized by RNA polymerase containing sigma 29 occur in the region preceding the larger open reading frame. Although no transcription-termination signal was identified downstream of the smaller coding region, analysis with integrational plasmids and determination of the size of spoIIIE messenger RNA suggest that the locus does not contain a third gene.    The structural gene of the spoVE locus of Bacillus subtilis was replaced with the promoterless lacZ gene of Escherichia coli. The spoVE::lacZ gene fusion was transferred to the B. subtilis chromosome and beta-galactosidase activity was measured under sporulation conditions. Expression of the hybrid gene could be detected as early as 40 min after the induction of sporulation. Transcription of the spoVE::lacZ gene was dependent on the products of two stage 0 loci, spo0H and spo0K. Mutations in the spoIIA and spoIIG loci did not impede expression of spoVE and, therefore, neither of the sigma factors coded for by these loci seems to be necessary for its transcription. Consequently, the spoVE locus does not seem to be part of the dependent sequence of operons involved in the developmental change, although its protein product is clearly needed for the completion of spore formation.    Yudkin (1986) has shown that the spoIIAC gene of Bacillus subtilis cannot be cloned in Escherichia coli in such an orientation that it is expressed. This toxicity of the gene product has been attributed to its close homology with the sigma subunit of the E. coli RNA polymerase. The effect of six individual mutations in spoIIAC has now been studied. All six mutant genes could be cloned in E. coli in an orientation that does not allow expression. When in the orientation that permits expression, one mutant gene could not be cloned, and a second substantially hampered growth; both mutations lie in the region that is believed to encode the DNA-binding domain of the protein. By contrast, two missense mutations in the region of the gene thought to encode the domain that binds to the core RNA polymerase rendered the protein harmless in E. coli, as did two nonsense mutations.    The first gene of the Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase sigma 43 operon, P23, has a protein-coding capacity of 23,000 daltons. Sequence analysis revealed three potential translational initiation sites within the same reading frame, which could encode proteins of 23,000 (P23), 19,000 (P19), and 9,000 (P9) daltons, respectively. An internal promoter (P3), which is expressed only during the sporulation stage, is located between the second and the third translational start sites. By protein fusion to the Escherichia coli beta-galactosidase gene, we showed that all three translational initiation sites of the P23 gene are used in vivo in both E. coli and B. subtilis, and regulation for differential expression of the three proteins during the development of B. subtilis is coupled to the transcriptional promoter switching mechanism. The physiological function of these multiple gene products is unknown and is currently under investigation.    The expression in Escherichia coli of a cloned crystal protein gene from Bacillus thuringiensis was investigated through the use of fusions of the crystal protein gene promoter to beta-galactosidase and catechol oxidase genes. Analysis of deletion and insertion derivatives of the crystal protein gene promoter showed that a region of B. thuringiensis DNA located between 87 and 258 base pairs upstream from the transcription initiation site caused reduced transcription from this promoter. Insertion of Tn5 145 base pairs upstream from the transcription initiation site resulted in overproduction of the crystal protein. S1 nuclease mapping experiments failed to detect transcription from an outwardly directed promoter in Tn5, indicating that the overproduction resulted from the disruption or repositioning of the transcription-suppressing region.    A 3.6 kb HindIII DNA fragment from Bacillus sphaericus 1593M was cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli and B. subtilis using pHV33 as shuttle vector and in the cyanobacterium Anacystis nidulans R2 with pUC303 as shuttle vector. The level of toxin activity of the respective recombinant plasmids pGsp04 and pGsp12 against Culex mosquito larvae was found to be the same in Escherichia coli and in the cyanobacterium.    The location of the repressor gene, blaI, for the beta-lactamase gene blaP of Bacillus licheniformis 749, on the 5&apos; side of blaP, was confirmed by sequencing the bla region of the constitutive mutant 749/C. An amber stop codon, likely to result in a nonfunctional truncated repressor, was found at codon 32 of the 128 codon blaI open reading frame (ORF) located 5&apos; to blaP. In order to study the DNA binding activity of the repressor, the structural gene for blaI, from strain 749, with its ribosome binding site was expressed using a two plasmid T7 RNA polymerase/promotor system (S. Tabor and C. C. Richardson. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 82, 1074-1078 (1985). Heat induction of this system in Escherichia coli K38 resulted in the production of BlaI as 5-10% of the soluble cell protein. Repressor protein was then purified by ammonium sulfate fractionation and cation exchange chromatography. The sequence of the N-terminal 28 amino acid residues was determined and was as predicted from the DNA. Binding of BlaI to DNA was detected by the slower migration of protein DNA complexes during polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. BlaI was shown to selectively bind DNA fragments carrying the promoter regions of blaI and blaP.    The complete nucleotide sequence of the beta-xylosidase gene (xynB) of Bacillus pumilus IPO and its flanking regions was established. A 1617-bp open reading frame for beta-xylosidase, a homodimer enzyme, was observed. The amino acid sequence of the N-terminal region and the molecular mass 62607 Da) of the beta-xylosidase subunit, deduced from the DNA sequence, agreed with the result obtained with the purified enzyme. The Shine-Dalgarno sequence was found 8 bp upstream of the initiation codon, ATG. The xylanase gene (xynA) of the same strain was 4.6 kbp downstream of the 3&apos; end of xynB, and its DNA sequence was reported in our previous paper [Fukusaki, E., Panbangred, W., Shinmyo, A. &amp; Okada, H. (1984) FEBS Lett. 171, 197-201]. The results of the Northern hybridization suggested that the mRNA of xynA and xynB were produced separately. The 5&apos; and 3&apos; ends of the xynA and xynB gene were mapped with nuclease S1. The &apos;-10&apos; regions for promoter sequences of both genes were similar to the consensus sequence for B. subtilis RNA polymerases, the &apos;-35&apos; regions were different from all the known promoters for B. subtilis RNA polymerases.    sigma B (sigma 37) is a secondary species of RNA polymerase sigma factor found in the gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis. To study the function of sigma B genetically, we sought mutations that block the expression of a gene (ctc) known to be transcribed by sigma B-containing RNA polymerase in vitro. One such mutation, called crl, was found to map in or near the structural gene (sigB) for sigma B. To determine directly whether mutations in sigB would prevent transcription of ctc, we replaced sigB in the B. subtilis chromosome with insertion and deletion mutations that disrupted the sigma B coding sequence. Like crl, these in vitro-constructed mutations blocked expression of ctc, but had little or no effect on viability, sporulation, expression of the sporulation gene spoVG, or production of sporulation-associated alkaline protease. Using fusions of ctc to the reporter genes xylE and lacZ, we also identified mutations that enhanced ctc expression. One such mutation, called socB, was found to be located in an open reading frame immediately downstream of sigB.    In Bacillus subtilis the alpha, beta, gamma and delta components comprise 80-90% of the total acid-soluble spore proteins (ASSPs). Sequence analysis demonstrates that alpha and beta share 32 of their first 36 amino acids and are closely related to the A and C ASSPs of Bacillus megaterium spores, confirming the results of analysis of their cloned genes. Despite the difference in apparent size of gamma and delta, they have identical N-terminal sequences (37 residues). Unless gamma and delta derive from very recently duplicated genes, it appears that gamma is derived from delta, either in vivo or during isolation. Although the sequenced regions of gamma and delta have no homology to alpha and beta, outside of the previously recognized pentapeptide recognition sequence for the spore endopeptidase, they share 10 and 15 residue peptides flanking this sequence with ASSP B of B. megaterium, but in reverse order. At least two groups of ASSPs have, therefore, been conserved between B. subtilis and B. megaterium: the multigene AC alpha beta family and the B gamma (delta) group. Sequence conservation in each group implies selection for functions in addition to storage. Both the alpha and beta components of B. subtilis ASSPs and their mRNAs are located in the forespore compartment of cells at t5.5 of sporulation, the time of most rapid ASSP synthesis. The sizes of these transcripts (250-350 bp) and their ability to direct the in vitro synthesis of ASSPs of mature size, indicate that genes for these ASSPs are monocistronic, consistent with dispersed map location. Synthesis of ASSPs is, therefore, coordinately controlled by selective transcription in the forespore.    Upstream of the promoter of the Bacillus subtilis alpha-amylase gene (amyE) derived from an alpha-amylase hyper-producing strain, there is an inverted repeat sequence (palindromic sequence), which has a free energy of 21.2 kcal/mol due to the formation of stable stem-loop structure. The role of the palindromic sequence for the expression of amyE was studied using a plasmid encoding the amyE&apos;-&apos;bla (E. coli beta-lactamase) fused gene in an alpha-amylase-deficient B. subtilis mutant as the host. By the presence of the palindromic sequence, the transcription activity of the amyE promoter was enhanced approximately 6 fold by starch (3%) in the medium and was less repressed by glucose.    The citB of Bacillus subtilis codes for aconitase (D. W. Dingman and A. L. Sonenshein, J. Bacteriol. 169:3060-3065). By direct measurements of citB mRNA levels and by measurements of beta-galactosidase activity in a strain carrying a citB-lacZ fusion, we have examined the expression of citB during growth and sporulation. When cells were grown in nutrient broth sporulation medium, citB mRNA appeared in mid- to late-exponential phase and disappeared by the second hour of sporulation. This timing corresponded closely to the kinetics of appearance of aconitase enzyme activity. Decoyinine, a compound that induces sporulation in a defined medium, caused a rapid simultaneous increase in aconitase activity and citB transcription. After decoyinine addition, the rate of increase in aconitase activity in a 2-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (citK) mutant and in a citrate synthase (citA) mutant was significantly less than in an isogenic wild-type strain. This is apparently due to a failure to deplete 2-ketoglutarate and accumulate citrate. These metabolites might act as negative and positive effectors of citB expression, respectively. Mutations known to block sporulation at an early stage (spo0H and spo0B) had no appreciable effect on citB expression or aconitase activity. These results suggest that appearance of aconitase is stimulated by conditions that induce sporulation but is independent of certain gene products thought to act at an early stage of sporulation.    The DNA sequence for the promoter region of the Bacillus subtilis citB gene has been determined. Presumed &quot;-10&quot; and &quot;-35&quot; regions of the promoter have been identified, and transcriptional and translational start points of citB have been located. To correlate the DNA sequence of citB with the amino acid sequence of its presumed product, aconitase, it was necessary to devise a scheme for purification of this labile enzyme. This procedure relies on the ability to restore enzyme activity at each stage of purification by incubation in a reducing buffer containing a source of ferrous ions. B. subtilis aconitase appears to be a monomer with a molecular weight of approximately 120,000. The amino-terminal amino acids of aconitase fit the sequence predicted by analysis of the citB gene. Thus, citB codes for aconitase.    Studies were performed on the prtR gene which enhances the production of the Bacillus subtilis extracellular proteases and levansucrase, but not the alpha-amylase, RNase, and alkaline phosphatase. To investigate the mode of action of prtR, the Escherichia coli bla gene was placed under the control of two promoters. One was the promoter of the alkaline protease gene (aprE), and the other was the promoter of B. subtilis dihydrofolate reductase gene (dfrA). Expression of the bla gene was enhanced by prtR only when the apr promoter was used. From these results, it was concluded that the apr promoter or its vicinity was the target of prtR and that prtR does not affect the process after transcription. The mRNA levels of aprE and nprE (the neutral protease gene) were significantly increased by prtR, but the half-life of the aprE mRNA was not affected. These results show that the prtR gene product enhances protease production by increasing the rate of transcription initiation.    The gluconate (gnt) operon of Bacillus subtilis consists of four gnt genes; the second and third genes code for gluconate kinase (gluconokinase, EC 2.7.1.12) and gluconate permease, respectively. A fragment carrying the promoter of this operon (gnt promoter) and the first gene (gntR) was subcloned into a promoter probe vector (pPL603B). Repression of the expression of cat-86 gene, encoded in the vector portion of a constructed plasmid (pgnt21), that is under the control of the gnt promoter was removed by gluconate. The results of deletion analysis and of insertional inactivation of the gntR gene cloned in pgnt21 suggested that the product of the gntR gene, actually synthesized as a 29-kDa protein in vivo, is involved in repression of the gnt promoter. A 4-base-pair insertional mutation within the gntR gene constructed in vitro was introduced into the B. subtilis chromosomal gnt operon by use of linkage of the 4 base pairs to gntK10 in transformation. The introduced mutation gntR1 caused the constitutive expression of the gluconate kinase and gluconate permease genes. S1 nuclease analysis indicated that the mRNA of this operon is synthesized in the gntR1 strain and amounts of mRNA are not changed very much by gluconate, which acts as an inducer in the wild-type gene. These results strongly indicate that the gntR gene codes for a transcriptional negative regulator for the gnt operon.    The Bacillus subtilis sdhCAB operon contains the structural genes for the three subunits of the membrane bound succinate dehydrogenase complex. An sdh-specific transcript of about 3,450 nucleotides was detected in vegetative bacteria. S1 nuclease mapping experiments showed that the sdh operon is transcribed from a sigma-43 promoter; the transcript starts at a guanosine residue 90 base pairs upstream from the first gene of the operon, sdhC. No sdh transcript was found in B. subtilis carrying the sdh-115 mutation, which decreases expression of the sdh operon by more than 99%. The sdh-115 mutation is a G-to-A transition in the -35 region of the sigma-43 promoter. The sdh operon is sensitive to glucose repression. When the sdh promoter region was used to drive transcription of the cat-86 gene this gene also became glucose repressed.    Two DNA fragments which complement the alkaline phosphatase-negative mutation phoP of Bacillus subtilis were cloned from a B. subtilis chromosome with the prophage vector phi CM (a derivative of phi 105). One of the fragments contained the regulatory gene phoR in addition to phoP. Nucleotide sequence analysis of the phoP region revealed that the phoP gene product consists of 241-amino-acid residues and that the sequence of these amino acids is extensively homologous with the sequence of the phoB gene product. This protein is the positive regulator for the phosphate regulon in Escherichia coli. It therefore appears that phoP is a regulatory gene for alkaline phosphatase synthesis in B. subtilis.    Five recombinant E. coli clones exhibiting toxicity to Aedes aegypti larvae were obtained from a library of 800 clones containing XbaI DNA fragments of 110 kb plasmid from B. thuringiensis var. israelensis. All the five clones (pMU 14/258/303/388/679) had the same 3.8-kb insert and encoded a major protein of 130 kDa which was highly toxic to A. aegypti larvae. Three clones (pMU 258/303/388) transcribed the 130 kD a gene in the same direction as that of lac Z promoter of pUC12 vector whereas the transcription of the other two (pMU 14/679) was in the opposite direction. A 1.9-kb fragment of the 3.8 kb insert coded for a protein of 65 kDa. Partial DNA sequence of the 3.8 kb insert, corresponding to the 5&apos;-terminal of the 130 kDa gene, revealed a continuous reading frame, a Shine-Dalgarno sequence and a tentative 5&apos;-regulatory region. These results demonstrated that the 3.8 kb insert is a minimal DNA fragment containing a regulatory region plus the coding sequence of the 130 kDa protein that is highly toxic to mosquito larvae.    The pleiotropic stage 0 sporulation locus spo0E was isolated and sequenced. The spo0E gene was found to code for a protein of 9791 molecular weight. Two spo0E mutations were identified by sequence analysis and were found to give rise to nonsense codons within the gene. The results indicated that it is the lack of the spo0E gene product that is responsible for the sporulation-defective phenotype. The DNA fragment containing the spo0E locus was inhibitory to sporulation when present on a multicopy plasmid. Since DNA fragments containing only the upstream region of the gene were also inhibitory, this effect was not due to over-production of the spo0E gene product. Coupling the transcription of the spo0E gene to beta-galactosidase in an integrative plasmid vector revealed that active transcription of this gene begins at the end of exponential growth and continues through the early part of sporulation. Studies of the regulation of this gene have allowed the generation of a hypothesis to explain the interactions of those five stage 0 genes involved in the activation of sporulation-specific transcription.    Deletion of sigE, the structural gene for the sporulation-induced RNA polymerase sigma factor, sigma E, prevented endospore formation by Bacillus subtilis. The effects of integration of plasmids into the sigE region of the chromosome and the use of complementation analyses demonstrated that sigE is part of an operon that includes a promoter-proximal gene, spoIIGA, that is essential for sporulation. Gene fusions to the promoter of this operon, spoIIG, demonstrated that transcription from this promoter is induced at the beginning of sporulation and is dependent on several spoO genes.    The nucleotide sequence of a 2.9-kilobase Bacillus subtilis DNA fragment containing the entire coding region of aspartokinase II and adjacent chromosomal regions (Bondaryk, R. P., and Paulus, H. (1985a) J. Biol. Chem. 260, 585-591) has been determined. The results confirmed the earlier prediction that the two subunits of aspartokinase II, alpha and beta, are encoded by in-phase overlapping genes. The nucleotide sequence showed strong ribosome binding sites before the translation initiation codons of the alpha and beta subunits. Deletion of most of the coding region unique to the alpha subunit had no effect on the synthesis of the smaller beta subunit, demonstrating that the beta subunit is indeed the product of independent translation. The site of transcription initiation of the aspartokinase gene was found to be more than 300 nucleotides upstream from the translation start of the alpha subunit. The intervening region contained a short reading frame capable of encoding a 24-residue lysine-rich polypeptide, which overlaps a region of extensive dyad symmetry culminating in a rho-independent transcription terminator. This region may be an attenuator control element that regulates the expression of the aspartokinase gene in response to the availability of lysine, the end product of the pathway. The coding sequence of the aspartokinase II subunits was immediately followed by a rho-independent transcription terminator. This termination site has an unusual symmetry, which allows it also to serve as transcription terminator for a gene that converges on the aspartokinase II gene from the opposite direction, an interesting example of genetic economy. The deduced amino acid sequence of B. subtilis aspartokinase II was compared with the sequences of the three aspartokinases from Escherichia coli (Cassan, M., Parsot, C., Cohen, G. N., and Patte, J. C. (1986) J. Biol. Chem. 261, 1052-1057). Significant sequence similarities suggest a close evolutionary relationship between the four enzymes.    An approximately 16-kilobase pair region of the Bacillus subtilis chromosome at 55 degrees containing genes for de novo purine nucleotide synthesis (Piggot, P. J., and Hoch, J. A. (1985) Microbiol. Rev. 49, 158-179) was cloned. The nucleotide sequence of over 13 kilobase pairs indicates that this region contains a cluster of 12 genes, 11 of which encode enzymes that catalyze the 10 reactions for de novo purine nucleotide synthesis from 5-phosphoribosyl 1-pyrophosphate to IMP. The genes were identified by complementation of Escherichia coli pur mutants and by sequence comparisons with homologous enzymes. The cluster is likely an operon and is organized into three groups of overlapping genes followed by the last gene: purEKB-purC(orf)QLF-purMNH(J)-purD. Sequence comparisons provide evidence for homology of monofunctional purine nucleotide biosynthetic enzymes from B. subtilis with the corresponding multifunctional enzymes from yeast and Drosophila. Sequence alignment of the phosphoribosylaminoimidazole carboxylase heterodimer from B. subtilis with the monomeric enzyme from Methanobrevibacter smithii indicates an evolutionary relationship between these two enzymes. S1 nuclease analysis was used to map the mRNA 5&apos; and 3&apos; ends and to estimate levels of mRNA. These experiments indicate that synthesis of purine nucleotides is regulated independently by adenine and guanine nucleotides. Adenine nucleotides regulate transcription initiation. Guanine nucleotides regulate transcription by a termination-antitermination mechanism in a 242-nucleotide 5&apos; untranslated mRNA leader region. Groups of overlapping genes, regulated at least in part by transcription termination-antitermination is likely to be a common theme for genetic organization and regulation of biosynthetic genes in this Gram-positive organism.    Previous studies have shown that peritoneal macrophages from mice chronically infected with Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) become highly cytotoxic for tumor targets upon further in vitro triggering with a variety of agents. In the current studies, achievement of this activated state was characterized by the production and release of a cytotoxin, herein termed cytolytic factor (CF), which appeared in the fluid phase. Production/release of CF by the macrophage required transcription, translation, glycosylation, and an intact secretory apparatus, as evident from inhibition by treatment with actinomycin-D, cycloheximide, tunicamycin, and monensin, respectively, prior to and during triggering with lipopolysaccharide (LPS). CF obtained by culture of BCG-activated macrophages appeared rapidly in the supernatant after triggering. Using the actinomycin-D-treated L-929 or EMT-6 targets in a microassay, CF secreted by macrophages cultured in low molecular weight serum components was detected as an approximately 150-kD component on Sephacryl S-200. CF demonstrated a spectrum of cytotoxic activity against a number of tumor and normal targets in vitro. Its lytic activity appeared equally effective whether the targets were cultured in medium containing fetal calf serum (FCS) or in Neuman-Tytell medium without serum during the assay. CF was moderately sensitive to treatment with TLCK and TAME; however, its activity in serum and apparent molecular weight distinguish it from a moiety obtained from BCG-activated murine macrophages and previously described. A rabbit heteroantiserum raised against highly purified necrosin, a product of the murine macrophage cell line J774.1, was extremely effective in neutralizing the biological activity of CF.    The regulation of sacB, the gene encoding Bacillus subtilis levansucrase is altered by mutations located in several loci unlinked to sacB. Amongst these, the sacS locus seems to play an important role in the induction of sacB by sucrose. We have cloned sacS and found evidence suggesting that it contains two genes. The product of the first gene might repress the expression of the second; the second gene encodes a positive regulator of levansucrase synthesis, since its deletion abolishes this synthesis. There is a palindromic sequence resembling Q-independent terminators between the sacB promoter and the structural gene. Mutations affecting this palindrome make sacB constitutive. This suggests that the putative terminator is involved in the induction of sacB by sucrose. We discuss the possibility that the sacS-encoded positive regulator is a sucrose-dependent antiterminator which modulates transcription termination between the sacB promoter and the structural gene.    The Pseudomonas putida TOL plasmid pWWO carries an operon that specifies a meta-cleavage pathway for the catabolism of benzoate and toluates whose transcription is positively regulated by the xylS gene product. Stimulation of transcription of the operon is thought to result from activation of this protein by pathway substrates/effectors. In the present study, overexpression of the xylS gene has led to identification of the regulator as a 33 kDa protein. Overexpression of xylS also resulted in partially constitutive, i.e. effector-independent expression of the meta-cleavage operon. Determination of the polynucleotide sequence of the xylS gene revealed amino acid sequence homology with several DNA binding proteins, particularly with the araC products of Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium and with the nifA and ntrC products of Klebsiella pneumoniae. Homologous sequences were mainly located in an alpha-helix-turn-alpha-helix domain of the polypeptide. Interestingly, amino acid sequence homology was also found with sigma factors of E. coli (ntrA and htpR products) and Bacillus subtilis (spoIIG and phage SPOI Gp34 products) and other RNA polymerase core-interacting proteins, such as the E. coli nusA product.    To investigate the organization of tRNA genes in the honeybee pathogen, Spiroplasma melliferum (previously referred to as Spiroplasma sp. BC3), total labeled tRNA from S. melliferum was used as a hybridization probe to an EcoRI digest of the genomic DNA. The results show two, or possibly three, strongly hybridizing bands. Comparing the pattern obtained to that of Bacillus subtilis DNA suggests either that the S. melliferum tRNA genes are more extensively clustered or, more likely, that the S. melliferum genome does not encode a full complement of tRNA genes, as has been suggested for other Mollicutes. We screened a library of EcoRI fragments of S. melliferum DNA cloned in pBR322 with total radioactive tRNA as a probe and selected one of the tRNA gene clusters. Subsequent sequence analysis of a portion of the clone showed 10 tRNA genes probably comprising a single operon. Comparison of sequence with a tRNA gene cluster from Mycoplasma mycoides and a portion of a cluster from B. subtilis showed an identical order of tRNA genes and the isoacceptors encoded. Such a striking comparison in gram-positive eubacteria suggests an important function for regulation and co-transcription of these tRNA genes.    We have cloned a 14 kb DNA segment containing the coding sequence (polC) for DNA polymerase III (PolIII) from the Bacillus subtilis chromosome. The plasmid carrying the sequence, pRO10, directs the synthesis of the 160 kDa PolIII protein and three additional polypeptides in Escherichia coli maxicells from strain CSR603. A set of deletion derivatives of pRO10 was constructed in vitro. The location of the PolIII coding sequence and the direction of transcription through the polC gene were determined by analysis of the truncated polypeptides observed in extracts of CSR603 transformants. Two HindIII segments subcloned from pRO10 were found to contain promoter sequences which function in E. coli and in vegetative phase B. subtilis cells. The location of the promoter sequence was determined with respect to the polC gene. The B. subtilis polC gene did not complement the temperature-sensitive defect of an E. coli PolIII mutant (dnaE486). The presence of the complete B. subtilis polC gene on a multicopy plasmid inhibited the growth of E. coli cells.    We report the construction and use of a new promoter probe vehicle capable of allowing extremely sensitive measurements of transcriptional activity promoted from random, chromosomal DNA fragment inserts. Coupled with the advantage of sensitivity, the detection system is noninvasive, nondestructive, and provides real-time reportage of expression potential. These latter aspects make it an especially valuable system for a continuing analysis of the complex transcriptional regulation patterns now recognized as a dominant control feature during the differentiation and morphogenesis characteristic of the sporulation cycle in Bacillus species. In this respect we describe the isolation of DNA fragments from B. megaterium and B. subtilis capable of initiating transcription in both the respective parent organisms and, in certain instances, also in Escherichia coli. Detailed luminescence studies showed that several promoter regions which are entirely or substantially developmentally controlled were isolated.    The DNA sequence of the Bacillus subtilis DLG endo-beta-1,4-glucanase gene was determined, and the in vivo site of transcription initiation was located. Immediately upstream from the transcription start site were sequences closely resembling those recognized by B. subtilis sigma 43-RNA polymerase. Two possible ribosome-binding sites were observed downstream from the transcription start site. These were followed by a long open reading frame capable of encoding a protein of ca. 55,000 daltons. A signal sequence, typical of those present in gram-positive organisms, was observed at the amino terminus of the open reading frame. Purification of the mature exocellular beta-1,4-glucanase and subsequent amino-terminal protein sequencing defined the site of signal sequence processing to be between two alanine residues following the hydrophobic portion of the signal sequence. The probability of additional carboxy-terminal processing of the beta-1,4-glucanase precursor is discussed. S1 nuclease protection studies showed that the amount of beta-1,4-glucanase mRNA in cells increased significantly as the culture entered the stationary phase. In addition, glucose was found to dramatically stimulate the amount of beta-1,4-glucanase mRNA in vivo. Finally, the specific activities of purified B. subtilis DLG endo-beta-1,4-glucanase and Trichoderma reesei QM9414 endo-beta-1,4-glucanase (EC 3.2.1.4) were compared by using the noncrystalline cellulosic substrate trinitrophenyl-carboxymethyl cellulose.    The nucleotide sequence of the streptothricin acetyltransferase (STAT) gene from streptothricin-producing Streptomyces lavendulae predicts a 189-amino-acid protein of molecular weight 20,000, which is consistent with that determined by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of the purified enzyme. The amino acid composition and the NH2-terminal sequence determined by using the purified protein are in good agreement with those predicted from the nucleotide sequence, except for the absence of the NH2-terminal methionine in the mature protein. High-resolution S1 nuclease protection mapping suggests that transcription initiates at or near the adenine residue which is the first position of the translational initiation triplet (AUG) of STAT. Another open reading frame located just upstream of the STAT gene was detected and contains a region bearing a strong resemblance to DNA-binding domains which are conserved in known DNA-binding proteins. By addition of promoter signals and a synthetic ribosome-binding (Shine-Dalgarno) sequence at an appropriate position upstream of the STAT translational start codon, the STAT gene confers streptothricin resistance on Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis. The STAT coding sequence with both the promoter of a B. subtilis cellulase gene and a synthetic Shine-Dalgarno sequence was functionally expressed in Streptomyces lividans, which suggests that the addition of an artificial leader upstream of the translational initiation codon (AUG) does not significantly influence the translation of STAT.    The discovery of secondary sigma factors in Bacillus subtilis that enable RNA polymerase to transcribe cloned sporulation genes in vitro has led to the proposal that the appearance of new sigma factors during sporulation directs RNA polymerase to the different temporal classes of sporulation genes. One sigma factor, which appears 2 h after the initiation of sporulation, is sigma E (formerly sigma 29). Mutations that inactivate the structural gene for sigma E prevent transcription from promoter G4. To determine whether sigma E-RNA polymerase interacts with the G4 promoter in vivo, we examined the effects of six single-base-pair substitutions in the G4 promoter on its utilization in vivo and in vitro by sigma E-RNA polymerase. The mutations in the G4 promoter affected utilization of the promoter in vivo in the same way that they affected its utilization in vitro by purified sigma E-RNA polymerase; therefore, we conclude that this polymerase interacts directly with the G4 promoter in vivo. The effects of these mutations also support the model in which sigma E-RNA polymerase utilizes promoters by interacting with two distinct sets of nucleotides located 10 and 35 base pairs upstream from the start point of transcription.    Tyrocidine is a cyclic decapeptide antibiotic which is produced and secreted by stationary-phase cells of the sporeforming bacterium Bacillus brevis. We identified the promoter for the B. brevis structural gene (tycA) for tyrocidine synthetase I, the enzyme catalyzing the first step in tyrocidine biosynthesis, and studied its regulation in cells of B. brevis and Bacillus subtilis. Transcription from the tycA promoter was induced at the end of the exponential phase of the growth cycle in B. brevis cells growing in sporulation medium. To study the regulation of tycA in B. subtilis, we constructed a derivative of the B. subtilis bacteriophage SP beta containing a transcriptional fusion of the tycA promoter to the lacZ gene of Escherichia coli and introduced the tycA-lacZ operon fusion by means of specialized transduction into sporulation mutants known to be blocked in sporulation-associated antibiotic production. Our principal finding was that tycA-directed lacZ expression was impaired in the stage-0 mutants with mutations spo0A, spo0B, and spo0E but not in spo0C, spo0F, spo0H, or spo+ bacteria. The dependence on the spo0A gene product could be entirely bypassed by an abrB suppressor mutation, which caused tycA-lacZ to be transcribed constitutively at all stages of growth. A simple model is proposed for the mechanism of tycA induction based on the Spo0A-dependent inactivation of Ab-B protein, which is proposed to be a negative regulator of tycA transcription.    Transcription of the Bacillus subtilis gene spoVG is induced at the onset of sporulation and is dependent on the products of the stage-0 regulatory genes spo0A, spo0B, and spo0H. We show here that the dependence of spoVG transcription on Spo0A and Spo0B (but not Spo0H) can be bypassed by a mutation at abrB, a previously identified locus at which mutations that suppress some of the phenotypes of spo0A are often located, or by a cis-acting mutation within the spoVG promoter. To explain the epistatis of abrB to spo0A and spo0B mutations, we propose that AbrB acts, directly or indirectly, to block transcription of spoVG and that Spo0A and Spo0B cause inactivation of the abrB gene product(s). Spo0A-Spo0B-dependent inactivation of AbrB could be a general explanation for the pleiotropic effects of spo0A and spo0B mutations on B. subtilis gene expression.    Sequencing data indicated that the RNA polymerase sigma 43 operon of Bacillus subtilis consisted of three genes, P23 (function unknown), dnaE (DNA primase), and rpoD (sigma 43) (Wang and Doi 1986a). S1 nuclease mapping experiments with RNA from various stages of growth demonstrated the presence of two overlapping sigma 43 promoters that controlled the expression of the operon during growth and a sigma 37 promoter that regulated the expression of the operon during the sporulation phase. This promoter switching mechanism ensured that this important operon would be expressed during different nutritional states of the cell and also illustrated a function for the minor RNA polymerase sigma 37 holoenzyme in the expression of genes which are normally expressed during the logarithmic phase of growth. The location of the transcription termination signal confirmed that the sigma 43 operon consists of three genes.    Bacillus mesentericus DNA fragments carrying promoters were cloned in Bacillus subtilis. The nucleotide sequences of four promoters, the sites of transcription initiation and the levels of promoter-mediated expression of pPL603 CAT gene at different stages of cell growth were determined. It was identified, that the two promoters (P435 and P442) are the typical sigma 43-RNA polymerase promoters. Promoter P462 possessed the unusual nucleotide sequence and induced the expression of indicator CAT gene at the middle of the stationary phase of cell growth. The next P428 promoter was found to be a complex promoter composed of three overlapping ones: P428-1, P428-2 and P428-3. P428-3 is the sigma 43-specific promoter which revealed the high degree of homology with Bacillus subtilis spoOB gene promoter. We suggest the promoters P428-1 and P428-2 to be sigma 43- and sigma 37-RNA polymerase specific, respectively.    Evidence is presented that a sporulation-essential sigma factor of Bacillus subtilis, sigma 29, is synthesized as an inactive precursor (P31) and that its activation occurs by a developmentally regulated cleavage of 29 amino acids from the P31 amino terminus. A pulse-chase experiment demonstrated that sigma 29 was derived from a preexisting protein, with appearance of radioactively labeled sigma 29 paralleling the disappearance of labeled P31. The disappearance of pulse-labeled P31 did not occur when the experiment was done with a B. subtilis strain carrying a mutation in a locus (spoIIE) required for sigma 29, but not P31, synthesis. Microsequencing of sigma 29 protein revealed that its amino terminus originates at amino acid 30 of the P31 amino acid sequence. In order to test whether a proteolytic event alone could activate P31 to a protein with sigma 29-like properties, a fusion protein (P31*) containing most of P31 was overproduced in Escherichia coli and converted in vitro into a protein with the electrophoretic mobility of sigma 29 by limited treatment with Staphylococcus aureus V8 protease. Protease-treated P31*, but not untreated P31*, was capable of directing B. subtilis core RNA polymerase to specifically initiate RNA synthesis at a sigma 29-recognized promoter in vitro.    The outB gene is one of the genes involved in the process of spore outgrowth in Bacillus subtilis. The gene has been cloned in bacteriophage lambda and subcloned in plasmids. We have determined the sequence of 2,553 base pairs around the outB locus. The locus was found to code for a protein of about 30,000 daltons. Analysis of the in vivo transcripts from this region by RNase protection experiments revealed the presence of two start sites for transcription. Two potential promoters for these transcripts can be tentatively assigned from the sequence data. The amount of one transcript is highest during outgrowth and vegetative growth and absent during the stationary phase. The second transcript is present at a low level throughout the cell cycle.    A ca. 10-kilobase (kb) HindIII fragment of plasmid DNA from Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis was cloned into plasmid pUC9 and transformed into Escherichia coli. Extracts of the recombinant strain contained a 27-kilodalton (kDa) peptide that reacted with antibodies to a 27-kDa peptide isolated from crystals produced by B. thuringiensis subsp. israelensis. Extracts of the recombinant strain were hemolytic and toxic to Aedes aegypti larvae. Full expression of the 27-kDa peptide required the presence of a ca. 0.8-kb region of DNA located 4 kb upstream from the structural gene; the 0.8-kb region could be present in cis or trans relative to the gene and apparently acted post-transcriptionally. Analysis of maxicells showed that the 10-kb insert also coded for peptides of 67, 20, and 16 kDa; data obtained with different subclones suggest that the 20-kDa peptide is encoded in the 0.8-kb DNA region.    The spoIIAC gene was cloned from chromosomal DNA of seven spoIIAC mutants of Bacillus subtilis, and the complete sequence of the gene was determined for each mutant. Three of the mutants proved to have chain-terminating mutations (one of which, previously shown to be suppressible by sup-3, was identified as amber); these led in every case to complete failure either to manufacture spores or to synthesize two enzymes normally associated with stage II of sporulation. The four remaining mutations were missense, and these corresponded to a phenotype in which a few spores are formed and about half the wild-type quantities of the two enzymes are made. Of the four missense mutations, two were near the promoter-distal end of the gene, in a region believed to correspond to the DNA-binding domain of the sigma factor that spoIIAC encodes. The remaining two mutations were in the region of the gene that is thought to correspond to the domain of the protein that interacts with core RNA polymerase.    A coupled in vitro protein-synthesizing system has been developed with components derived totally from Bacillus subtilis. The system synthesized specific gene products from various exogenous DNA templates, including B. subtilis phage phi 29, plasmid pUB110, and a heterologous B. subtilis-Escherichia coli gene fusion containing the transposon Tn9-derived chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (cat) gene. The gene fusion product was able to show CAT activity, bind specifically to a Sephacryl-chloramphenicol column, and react immunologically against anti-CAT antiserum. The fidelity of this in vitro system was demonstrated by the synthesis of gene products identical to that made in vivo. We suggest that this system may be used to study the regulation of gene expression in vitro.    The construction of lacZ fusions in frame with the spo0H gene of Bacillus licheniformis enabled us to study the expression of this gene under various growth conditions and in various genetic backgrounds. spo0H was expressed during vegetative growth, but the levels increased during early stationary phase and then decreased several hours later. Expression of the gene was not repressed by glucose, but was induced by decoyinine, an inhibitor of guanine nucleotide biosynthesis, which can induce sporulation. Of those tested, the only spo0 gene required for the expression of spo0H was spo0A, and this requirement was eliminated by the abrB mutation, a partial suppressor of spo0A function. spo0H-lacZ expression was much higher in a strain with a deletion in the spo0H gene.    cat-86 is a promoter-deficient plasmid gene that encodes chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT). Insertion of a promoter at a site 144 base pairs 5&apos; to the cat-86 coding sequence activates transcription of the gene and allows cat-86 to specify chloramphenicol-inducible CAT activity in Bacillus subtilis. Induction of cat-86 by chloramphenicol has been shown to result from a regulatory event that activates translation of cat-86 mRNA that is present in cells before the addition of inducer (E. J. Duvall and P. S. Lovett, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83:3939-3943, 1986). In the present study we show an unusual property of cat-86 mRNA. Full-length cat-86 transcripts, consisting of 920 nucleotides (nt), are cleaved in B. subtilis to yield two predominant fragmentation products: an 810-nt species that lacks sequences present at the 5&apos; end of the 920-nt species and a 720-nt species that lacks sequences present at the 3&apos; end of the 920-nt species. A third fragmentation product consisting of 620 nt may result from the cleavage of a single 920-nt transcript at both the 5&apos; and 3&apos; ends. The sequences which are missing from the 720- and 620-nt species suggest that these transcripts cannot be translated into functional CAT. The 810-nt species lacks sequences from the 5&apos; regulatory region, and it is not yet certain whether or not translation of this species can be induced by chloramphenicol. The ratio of 920-nt molecules/720-nt molecules in rifampin-treated cells is increased when the cells are grown in chloramphenicol.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    ermC encodes a methylase that modifies 23 S rRNA, conferring resistance to macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin B antibiotics. The expression of this gene is induced by erythromycin using a translational mechanism. We have employed the inherent RNase activity of a Bacillus subtilis S-30 extract as a probe for studying the interaction of ribosomes with ermC mRNA in the presence of antibiotics. 5&apos; end-labeled ermC runoff transcript is a substrate for this RNase activity, while the ribosome-bound region of the RNA appears to be protected. Erythromycin- and oleandomycin-dependent protection of fragments of length 79-81 was observed during the translation of end-labeled ermC transcript. This occurs only using unmethylated (erythromycin sensitive) ribosomes. Various other antibiotics including clindomycin, tylosin, and lincomycin do not show this specific protection. These effects parallel the in vivo specificity of ermC induction. The effect of erythromycin can be abolished by using oligonucleotides complementary to regions of the ermC transcript upstream from nucleotide 71 and not by using an oligonucleotide complementary to a region of ermC downstream from that position. These results are interpretable in terms of the translational attenuation model and demonstrate that erythromycin-bound ribosomes initiate translation of the leader peptide, stall upstream from nucleotide 80 on the ermC mRNA, and thus make the ribosome-binding site for methylase message available for ribosome interaction.    The complete nucleotide sequence of the Bacillus subtilis dnaB gene and its flanking regions was determined. The dnaB gene is essential for both replication initiation and membrane attachment of the origin region of the chromosome and plasmid pUB110. It has been known that there are two different classes (dnaBI and dnaBII) in the dnaB mutants; dnaBI is essential for both chromosome and pUB110 replication, whereas dnaBII is necessary only for chromosome replication. The nucleotide sequence revealed that dnaBI and dnaBII are two functional domains in the single dnaB gene. The mutation sites of two mutants, belonging to dnaBI and dnaBII, respectively, were also determined as substitutions of amino acids. The putative DnaB protein deduced from nucleotide sequence consists of 472 amino acids (55 kDa) with no cysteine residue. A 55-kDa polypeptide produced in an in vitro transcription-translation system was labeled with [35S]methionine but not with [35S]cysteine. The DnaB protein has a highly hydrophobic sequence of 20 amino acids in its N-terminal region, a possible DNA binding site, and two possible ATP binding sites. The dnaBI domain is between the DNA binding site and one of the ATP binding sites; the dnaBII domain is close to the other ATP binding site. Comparison of the amino acid sequence between the &quot;dnaB protein&quot; and those of other dna genes of Escherichia coli showed no homology, suggesting that the dnaB gene of B. subtilis may be analogous to a hitherto undiscovered gene in E. coli.    The nucleotide sequence of a 2.7-kilobase segment of DNA containing the sdhA and sdhB genes encoding the flavoprotein (Fp, sdhA) and iron-sulfur protein (Ip, sdhB) subunits of the succinate dehydrogenase of Bacillus subtilis was determined. This sequence extends the previously reported sequence encoding the cytochrome b558 subunit (sdhC) and completes the sequence of the sdh operon, sdhCAB. The predicted molecular weights for the Fp and Ip subunits, 65,186 (585 amino acids) and 28,285 (252 amino acids), agreed with the values determined independently for the labeled Fp and Ip antigens, although it appeared that the B. subtilis Fp was not functional after expression of the sdhA gene in Escherichia coli. Both subunits closely resembled the corresponding Fp and Ip subunits of the succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) and fumarate reductase of E. coli in size, composition, and amino acid sequence. The sequence homologies further indicated that the B. subtilis SDH subunits are equally related to the SDH and fumarate reductase subunits of E. coli but are less closely related than are the corresponding pairs of E. coli subunits. The regions of highest sequence conservation were identifiable as the catalytically significant flavin adenine dinucleotide-binding sites and cysteine clusters of the iron-sulfur centers.    We began an analysis of rpoF, the gene encoding the cryptic, 37,000-dalton minor sigma factor (sigma-37) of Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase. Using antibody raised against sigma-37 holoenzyme to probe a lambda gt11 expression vector library, we isolated a 901-base-pair EcoRI fragment that expressed the COOH-terminal half of sigma-37 fused to lacZ. We used this fragment as a hybridization probe to isolate the entire rpoF gene and additional flanking sequences. Identity of the cloned gene was confirmed by the size and immunological reaction of its product expressed in Escherichia coli and, after DNA sequencing, by the homology of its predicted product (264 residues; 30,143 daltons) with other sigma factors. The DNA sequence also suggested that rpoF may lie in a gene cluster. Upstream of rpoF was an open reading frame that would encode a protein of 17,992 daltons; this frame overlapped the rpoF-coding sequence by 41 base pairs. Immediately following rpoF was a reading frame that would encode a protein of at least 20,000 daltons; expression of this region may be translationally coupled to that of rpoF. By plasmid integration and PBS1 transduction, we found the chromosomal locus of rpoF linked to ddl and dal at 40 degrees on the B. subtilis map and near no known lesions affecting growth regulation or development. Further, an rpoF null mutation resulting from gene disruption had no effect on cell growth or sporulation in rich medium, suggesting that sigma-37 may partly control a regulon not directly involved in the sporulation process.    It has not been clear whether the membrane-bound beta-lactamase III of Bacillus cereus 569 is a separate enzyme or a modified form of the secreted beta-lactamase I. The membrane enzyme is an acyl-glyceride thioether-linked lipoprotein (J. B. K. Nielsen and J. O. Lampen, Biochemistry 22:4652-4656, 1983) and thus is probably a separate entity. We cloned the beta-lactamase III gene (blaZ) on a 4.9-kilobase-pair ClaI fragment from mutant strain 569/H (constitutive for high-level production of beta-lactamases I, II, and III), and the nucleotide sequence was determined. The structural gene was flanked by typical promoter, transcription termination, and translation initiation sequences. Expression of the cloned gene in Escherichia coli was low in exponential-phase cultures and increased only as the cultures reached the stationary phase. The deduced amino acid sequence indicates a pre-beta-lactamase III of 316 amino acid residues (35,021 daltons), with a 29-residue signal peptide and a mature lipoprotein form of approximately 32,500 daltons. The 12 NH2-terminal residues of a 21-kilodalton tryptic peptide from the B. cereus membrane enzyme were in agreement with the sequence deduced from the cloned gene. The amino acid sequence was highly homologous to the class A beta-lactamases, especially that of Bacillus licheniformis 749. beta-Lactamase III is a distinct class A enzyme and the product of a separate gene (blaZ).    Transcription of the sporulation gene spoVG of Bacillus subtilis is induced at the onset of spore formation and depends on the products of the regulatory genes spoOA, spoOB, and spoOH. We describe two effects of propagating the promoter region of spoVG on a multicopy plasmid replicon in B. subtilis cells. One effect is that transcription from the plasmid-borne spoVG promoter is altered with respect to the time of its induction and the dependence on spoO gene products. An example of this effect is that plasmid propagation was observed to relieve substantially the inhibitory effect of a mutation in spoOH, the spoO gene upon which spoVG promoter activity is most strongly dependent. We present results which suggest that propagation on a plasmid replicon causes an alteration in the conformation of spoVG promoter DNA which somehow compensates for the defective spoOH gene product. Plasmid propagation did not, however, entirely eliminate the requirement for the spoOH gene product; little or no spoVG-directed RNA synthesis was observed in cells bearing a putative spoOH deletion mutation, a finding which indicates that SpoOH protein plays an indispensable role in spoVG promoter utilization. Another effect of propagating the promoter region of spoVG on a multicopy plasmid is to inhibit sporulation. S1 nuclease mapping experiments suggest that amplification of spoVG on a multicopy plasmid causes the titration of a transcription factor or minor form of RNA polymerase holoenzyme required for utilization of one of the two overlapping promoters which comprise the spoVG transcription initiation region.    The trp genes of Brevibacterium lactofermentum lie within a 7.72-kb HapII-BamHI fragment whose sequence has been determined (Matsui et al., 1986). The 5&apos;- and the 3&apos;-flanking regions of this gene cluster were subcloned as a 1.8-kb PstI-PstI and a 0.6-kb XhoI-BamHI fragment, respectively. The 5&apos;-flanking region encodes two open reading frames (ORFs); one corresponds to trpL, while the other corresponds to the N-terminal half of the trpE gene. Within the 17 amino acid residues of the predicted leader peptide encoded by trpL are found three contiguous tryptophan residues. By subcloning parts of the 1.8-kb PstI-PstI fragment into promoter probe vectors, a promoter situated 32 bp upstream from the presumptive trpL gene was identified. The -35 and the -10 region of this promoter, TACACA and AATAAT, respectively, are very similar to the Escherichia coli trp promoter. The trp promoter of B. lactofermentum functions in E. coli. A 14-bp imperfect palindrome that overlaps the -10 region apparently functions in B. lactofermentum but not in E. coli as a trp operator. Upstream of trpE, attenuator-like sequences are found that resemble the corresponding E. coli sequences. The 0.6-kb XhoI-BamHI 3&apos;-flanking fragment contains one ORF that encodes the C-terminal part of trpA. Downstream from trpA lies a Rho-independent terminator that resembles E. coli sequences that are situated downstream from the E. coli trp operon. Thus the trp control regions of the Gram-positive B. lactofermentum are more closely related in structure to the corresponding regions of the Gram-negative E. coli than to those of the Gram-positive Bacillus subtilis.    The nucleotide sequence of the second and third genes in the Bacillus subtilis spore germination locus, gerA, has been determined and the amino acid (aa) sequence was derived. Two open reading frames (ORFs), corresponding to genes II and III, encode 364-aa residue and 373-aa residue polypeptides, respectively. The gene II product, Mr 41,257, would contain long stretches of hydrophobic aa residues and may be a membrane protein; the gene III product, Mr 42,363, is relatively hydrophilic but possesses an apparent signal peptide for transfer across, and perhaps localisation on, a membrane. The ORFs for genes I and II overlap by eleven codons and the termination codon of gene II overlaps the initiation codon of gene III. Insertional inactivation experiments using integrational plasmids have indicated that the gerA locus is a single transcriptional unit. The expression of the gerA genes has been studied using a lacZ transcriptional fusion; they constitute a developmentally regulated operon.    Bacillus thuringiensis var. aizawai IC1 synthesises an insecticidal protein delta-endotoxin (130-135 kDa) that is toxic to both lepidopteran and dipteran larvae, and cross-reacts immunologically with certain monospecific lepidopteran toxins. A 166-kb plasmid from this bacterium was found to hybridise with an intragenic probe derived from the clone B. thuringiensis var. sotto lepidopteran-specific delta-endotoxin gene. A strongly hybridising 5.2-kb SstI fragment from var. aizawai plasmid DNA was cloned in pUC18. After subcloning of this DNA in Escherichia coli, recombinants were obtained that synthesised large amounts of a 130-135-kDa protein. The protein was deposited in the cytoplasm as microscopically visible inclusion bodies and lysates of these cells were found to be toxic to both lepidopteran and dipteran larvae by comparison with controls. The structural basis for the dual specificity of this var. aizawai toxin is now amenable to further study.    A human factor IX cDNA clone isolated from a liver cDNA library constructed in phage lambda gt11 vector was shown to express factor IX protein in Escherichia coli. A factor IX immunospecific protein of 46.8 kDa was expressed, but was not a beta-galactosidase-factor IX fusion protein. Expression was seen when the factor IX cDNA was cloned into two different vector systems, lambda gt11 and pUC9, in both orientations with respect to the vector lacZ promoter. The expression of factor IX was not under control of the lacZ promoter of either vector system. In addition, when the factor IX cDNA fragment was subcloned in both orientations into a promoterless cloning vector (p CPP3), the factor IX cDNA fragment demonstrated promoter activity when inserted in only one orientation resulting in expression of chloramphenicol acetyl transferase in E. coli and Bacillus subtilis. A DNA computer search of the N-terminal sequences of the factor IX gene revealed prokaryotic-like promoter and ribosome-binding site (RBS) sequences with strong homology to the E. coli consensus sequences. The predicted sites homologous with prokaryotic promoter and RBS consensus sequences are followed by an in-frame methionine which could correspond to the translation start codon of the expressed factor IX. This report provides the first evidence that a eukaryotic gene encodes the information necessary for both transcription and translation to control gene expression in a prokaryotic host.    The 6-phosphofructo-1-kinase (PFK) gene from Bacillus stearothermophilus has been expressed at high levels in Escherichia coli. This expression has been demonstrated by complementation studies, sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and PFK assays of cell extracts. A level of B. stearothermophilus PFK expression corresponding to 20% of the total extracted protein was calculated from densitometric scans of an SDS-polyacrylamide gel. The high level of recombinant gene expression will enable this laboratory to determine structure-function relationships in B. stearothermophilus PFK by the method of oligodeoxynucleotide-directed mutagenesis.    A DNA fragment from the Bacillus subtilis phage phi 29, containing the bidirectional transcription terminator TD1, where the right early transcription and late viral transcription terminate, has been inserted in one orientation between the aminoglycoside phosphotransferase (APH) gene (neo) and the phi 29 main early and late promoters present in derivative constructs of the Streptomyces promoter-probe plasmid pIJ486. The TD1 terminator is efficiently recognized in S. lividans and ends the transcription, started in vivo at the phi 29 promoters, at the same point as the B. subtilis RNA polymerase, resulting in a considerable reduction of the level of the APHII enzyme synthesized under the control of the phage promoters.    The nucleotide sequence of Bacillus phage phi 29 genes 14 (g14) and 15 (g15) have been determined and shown to encode proteins with molecular weights of 15,014 and 28,022, respectively. The g14 open reading frame (ORF) was confirmed by sequencing a sus14(1241) mutant. Gene product 15 (gp15) has considerable homology with Salmonella phage P22 lysozyme and lesser homology with Escherichia coli phage T4 lysozyme. Putative translation signals are identified. In addition, the role of a previously described promoter, B2, is discussed.    The Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase sigma 43 subunit and the phage SP82 encoded 28-kDa peptide are responsible for the binding of RNA polymerase to early and middle SP82 promoters, respectively. The delta peptide enhances the specificity of the interaction of B. subtilis RNA polymerase with these promoters. We have used sedimentation experiments to determine the effect of each of the three specificity factors, delta, sigma, and the 28-kDa peptide, on the binding of the other two factors to RNA polymerase core and the effect of NaCl on these binding equilibria. We show that sigma 43 and the 28-kDa peptide can each bind to RNA polymerase core at the same time as delta. Sigma 43 and the 28-kDa peptide have similar affinities to core at 0.1 M NaCl, but the 28-kDa peptide binds to core-delta more strongly than sigma 43. The implications of these findings with respect to the replacement of sigma 43 by the 28-kDa peptide and the mechanism of promoter search by B. subtilis RNA polymerase are discussed.    There are at least five different forms of RNA polymerase holoenzyme in Bacillus subtilis. These enzymes differ in their sigma subunit and their specificity for promoter utilization. One form of RNA polymerase (E sigma 29) that contains a 29,000 Mr sigma appears in B. subtilis about two hours after the initiation of endospore formation. The determination of the nucleotide sequences that govern utilization of promoters by E sigma 29 has been limited by the small number of cloned promoters that are recognized by E sigma 29. We have determined the nucleotide sequence of a recently isolated promoter (G4) that is used exclusively by E sigma 29 both in vitro and in vivo. The start-point of transcription was identified by S1 nuclease mapping and dinucleotide priming experiments and the probable promoter element was sequenced. We compared the sequence with that of six promoters that are used to varying degrees in vitro by E sigma 29 and found these sequences to be highly conserved at the -10 and near the -35 regions of these promoters. Single base substitutions were generated at positions -12, -15 and -36 of the G4 promoter and assayed for their influence on utilization by E sigma 29 in in-vitro competition experiments. The effects of these mutations in G4 on its use by E sigma 29 support a model in which E sigma 29 utilizes its cognate promoters by interacting with unique nucleotide sequences at the -10 region and near the -35 region of these promoters.    In Bacillus subtilis transcription of spoVG is activated within minutes after the initiation of sporulation. Mutations in several spo0 genes prevent the activation of spoVG transcription. We have found a sigma-like protein that is capable of directing core RNA polymerase to use the spoVG promoter in an in vitro run-off transcription assay. This sigma-like protein was not found to be associated with RNA polymerase in a spo0A or spo0B mutant but was present in a spo0H mutant. We suggest that one role of the spo0A gene product in transcription of spoVG is the modulation of RNA polymerase activity by this sigma-like protein.    The majority of early transcripts of the phi 29 bacteriophage are produced throughout the lytic cycle but the levels of a class of transcripts from the right end of the phi 29 genome are significantly reduced late in the infection. We have isolated a phage early protein which selectively interferes with the initiation in vitro of transcription from promoters at the right end of the phi 29 genome. The amino acid sequence of the purified inhibitory protein correlates to the sequence predicted from the phi 29 gene 6 reading frame. In addition the inhibitory protein was not detectable in cells infected with phage mutated in gene 6 and the decrease in transcription did not occur in vivo when nonpermissive cells were infected with phi 29(sus6). The results indicate that the gene 6 protein modulates transcription from the right side of the phi 29 genome.    We characterized the general properties of the heat shock response in Bacillus subtilis W168, B. subtilis JH642, and an spo0A mutant by using pulse-labeling of bacterial proteins and one-dimensional sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The transfer of cells from 37 to 50 degrees C repressed synthesis of most cellular proteins and led to the induction of at least 26 distinct heat shock proteins after about 3 min. Ethanol (4% [vol/vol]) induced a similar set of proteins, but somewhat more slowly. Synthesis of the majority of heat shock proteins at 50 degrees C returned to a steady-state level 20 to 40 min after the shock. Although no B. subtilis heat shock protein has yet been extensively characterized, three of these proteins were found to be immunologically related to the Escherichia coli heat shock proteins Dnak, Lon, and GroEL. Synthesis of both sigma 28 and sigma 43 proteins was sharply reduced during heat shock. Although a spo0A amber mutation blocks transcription from promoters used by at least two minor B. subtilis sigma factors, it did not alter the kinetics or general properties of the heat shock response.    Bacillus licheniformis penicillinase genes, penP and penI, are coded on a 4.2-kilobase EcoRI fragment of pTTE21 (T. Imanaka, T. Tanaka, H. Tsunekawa, and S. Aiba, J. Bacteriol. 147:776-186, 1981). The EcoRI fragment was subcloned in a low-copy-number plasmid pTB522 in Bacillus subtilis. B. subtilis carrying the recombinant plasmid pPTB60 (Tcr penP+ penI+) was chemically mutagenized. Of about 150,000 colonies, two penI(Ts) mutant plasmids, pPTB60D13 and pPTB60E24, were screened by the plate assay at 30 and 48 degrees C for penicillinase. By constructing recombinant plasmids between wild-type and mutant plasmids, the mutation points were shown to be located in a 1.7-kilobase EcoRI-PstI fragment. The EcoRI-PstI fragments of the wild-type plasmid and two mutant plasmids were sequenced. A large open reading frame, composed of 384 bases and 128 amino acid residues (molecular weight, 14,983), was found. Since the mutation points were located at different positions in the protein coding region (Ala to Val for pPTB60D13 and Pro to Leu for pPTB60E24), the coding region was concluded to be the penI gene. A Shine-Dalgarno sequence was found 7 bases upstream from the translation start site (ATG). A probable promoter sequence which is very similar to the consensus sequence was also found upstream of the penP promoter, but in the opposite direction. A consensus twofold symmetric sequence (AAAGTATTA CATATGTAAGNTTT) which might have been used as a repressor binding region was found downstream and in the midst of the penP promoter and also downstream of the penI promoter. The regulation of penP and penI by the repressor is discussed.    The crystalline parasporal inclusions (crystals) of Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis (Bti), which are specifically toxic to mosquito and black fly larvae, contain three main polypeptides of 28 kDa, 68 kDa and 130 kDa. The genes encoding the 28 kDa protein and the 130 kDa protein have been cloned from a large plasmid of Bti. Escherichia-coli recombinant clones containing the 130 kDa protein gene were highly active against larvae of Aedes aegypti and Culex pipiens, while B. subtilis recombinant cells containing the 28 kDa protein gene were haemolytic for sheep red blood cells. A fragment of the Bti plasmid which is partially homologous to the 130 kDa protein gene was also isolated; it probably corresponds to part of a second type of mosquitocidal toxin gene. Furthermore, restriction enzyme analysis suggested that the 130 kDa protein gene is located on the same Bti EcoRI fragment as another kind of Bti mosquitocidal protein gene cloned by Thorne et al. (1986). Hybridization experiments conducted with the 28 kDa protein gene and the 130 kDa protein gene showed that these two Bti genes are probably present in the plasmid DNA of B. thuringiensis subsp. morrisoni (PG14), which is also highly active against mosquito larvae.    The initiation sites of the RNA transcripts synthesized in vivo in Bacillus subtilis infected with bacteriophage phi 29 have been mapped by S1 protection experiments. Nine transcription initiation sites were localized along the entire phi 29 genome, close to previously reported B. subtilis and Escherichia coli RNA polymerase-binding sites. Eight of these sites corresponded to early transcription and only one corresponded to late transcription. By using 5&apos;-end-labeled RNA, four of the early sites and the late one were shown to be the main sites where initiation of transcription occurs in vivo in the phi 29 genome.    To investigate putative sorting domains in precursors to polypeptide hormones, we have constructed fusion proteins between the amino terminus of preproinsulin (ppI) and the bacterial cytoplasmic enzyme chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT). Our aim is to identify sequences in ppI, other than the signal peptide, that are necessary to mediate the intracellular sorting and secretion of the bacterial enzyme. Here we describe the in vitro translation of mRNAs encoding two chimeric molecules containing 71 and 38 residues, respectively, of the ppI NH2 terminus fused to the complete CAT sequence. The ppI signal peptide and 14 residues of the B-chain were sufficient to direct the translocation and segregation of CAT into microsomal membrane vesicles. Furthermore, the CAT enzyme underwent N-linked glycosylation, presumably at a single cryptic site, with an efficiency that was comparable to that of native glycoproteins synthesized in vitro. Partial amino-terminal sequencing demonstrated that the downstream sequences in the fusion proteins did not alter the specificity of signal peptidase, hence cleavage of the ppI signal peptide occurred at precisely the same site as in the native precursor. This is in contrast to results found in prokaryotic systems. These data demonstrate that the first 38 residues of ppI encode all the information necessary for binding to the endoplasmic reticulum membrane, translocation, and proteolytic (signal sequence) processing.    Recent data on regulation of gene activity in bacteria by substitution of RNA polymerase sigma subunits are reviewed. The htpR gene which controls the switch-on of the Escherichia coli heat-shock protein synthesis codes for sigma 32 subunit. sigma 32-containing RNA polymerase transcribes the heat-shock genes in vitro from specific promoters of no use for RNA polymerase containing the major sigma 70 subunit. Several minor sigma subunits have been found in Bacillus subtilis vegetative cells, in addition to the major sigma 55 subunit, differing in the specificity of promoter recognition. Many B. subtilis genes are controlled by tandemly located promoters recognized by RNA polymerases carrying different sigma subunits. sigma 29 subunit is encoded by spoIIG gene and is probably involved in the regulation of sporulation. Specific sigma subunits for transcribing &quot;middle&quot; or &quot;late&quot; genes are encoded by a number of phages.    We have determined the nucleotide sequence of a 1496 bp stretch of Bacillus subtilis chromosome that complements the gerE36 mutation. The sequence contains three open reading frames. One of these is part of the sdhC gene, the other two, whose functions are unknown, are capable of encoding proteins with Mr values of approximately 17,000 and 8500. The use of integrational plasmids to delimit the gerE transcriptional unit shows that the gerE locus consists of one gene, which encodes a polypeptide of 74 amino acid residues and which is switched on after t3 during sporulation of wild-type B. subtilis 168.    The sporulation gene spoIIIC from Bacillus subtilis was fused to the lacZ gene from Escherichia coli, so that the transcription of the lacZ gene was under the control of the spoIIIC promoter. Production of beta-galactosidase, under conditions of sporulation, was then used as an indicator to study the expression of spoIIIC in relation to other sporulation loci. Expression of spoIIIC, which occurred only in the mother cell compartment, was prevented by mutations in all of the stage 0 and stage II loci, and also by spoIIID, spoIVA and spoIVB mutations. By contrast, the last three operons are not needed for expression of spoVA, which has previously been shown to be spore-specific. In consequence, a branched pathway of gene expression is proposed. One branch leads to expression of spoVA within the spore compartment, the other to expression of spoIIIC in the mother cell.    The spoIID gene, which is involved in Bacillus subtilis sporulation, was fused to the beta-galactosidase gene, lacZ, of Escherichia coli so that the expression of beta-galactosidase would be under the control of the spoIID locus. When the fused product was inserted into the B. subtilis chromosome, production of beta-galactosidase indicated that the spoIID gene was expressed 1.5 h after the start of sporulation. When the spoIID::lacZ fusion was inserted into the chromosome of sporulation mutants, all strains carrying spo0 lesions and those with mutations in spoIIA, spoIIE and spoIIG loci failed to make beta-galactosidase. The proposed provisional order of expression of operons governing stage II is spoIIA----[spoIIG, spoIIE]----[spoIID, spoIIB, spoIIF].    A series of plasmids has been constructed that can be used to fuse the beta-galactosidase gene (lacZ) of Escherichia coli to chromosomal genes of Bacillus subtilis. Insertion of the lacZ gene is facilitated by the use of a selectable chloramphenicol acetyl-transferase (cat) gene. The latter is included, along with the lacZ gene, in a single DNA fragment or &apos;cartridge&apos; that can be removed from the plasmid with a variety of different restriction endonucleases. Methods applicable to any cloned B. subtilis gene are described that enable the lac-cat cartridge to be inserted at specific sites, or at random, directly into the B. subtilis chromosome in a single step. These single-copy chromosomal fusions can be readily transferred, by selection for chloramphenicol resistance, to a temperate phage such as phi 105, to permit a more extensive genetic analysis of the expression of the target gene. Alternatively, the lac-cat cartridge and flanking DNA sequences can be transferred into different genetic backgrounds by transformation. These techniques have been used to construct, in a single step, lac fusions to genes in the sporulation operons spoIIA and spoVA.    An integrable plasmid, pOK4, which replicated independently in Escherichia coli was constructed for generating transcriptional fusions in vivo in Bacillus DNA. It did not replicate independently in Bacillus subtilis, but it could be made to integrate into the chromosome of B. subtilis if sequences homologous to chromosomal sequences were inserted into it. It had a selectable marker for chloramphenicol resistance and carried unique sites for EcoRI and SmaI just to the 5&apos; side of a promoterless alpha-amylase gene from Bacillus licheniformis. When B. subtilis DNA fragments were ligated into one of these sites and the ligation mixture was used to transform an alpha-amylase-negative B. subtilis strain, chloramphenicol-resistant transformants could be isolated conveniently. Many of these were alpha-amylase positive, owing to the fusion of the plasmid amylase gene to chromosomal operons. In principle, because integration need not be mutagenic, it is possible to obtain fusions to any chromosomal operon. The site of each integration can be mapped, and the flanking sequences can be cloned into E. coli. The alpha-amylase gene can be used to detect regulated genes. We used it as an indicator to detect operons which are DNA-damage-inducible (din), and we identified insertions in both SP beta and PBSX prophages.    The gene encoding the protective antigen (PA) moiety of the tripartite exotoxin of Bacillus anthracis was cloned from the recombinant plasmid pSE36 into Bacillus subtilis 1S53 by using the plasmid vector pUB110. Two clones, designated PA1 and PA2, were identified which produced PA in liquid cultures at levels of 20.5 to 41.9 micrograms/ml. This PA was identical to B. anthracis Sterne PA with respect to migration on sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels and to Western blot antigenic reactivity. Addition of lethal factor or edema factor to PA1 and PA2 supernatants generated biologically active anthrax lethal toxin or edema-producing toxin, respectively. The recombinant plasmid in PA1 (pPA101) was 7.8 kilobases, whereas the PA2 strain plasmid (pPA102) was 6.1 kilobases. Both plasmids had deletions extending into the insert sequence but not into the DNA encoding the PA protein. Immunization with the live recombinant strains protected guinea pigs from lethal challenge with virulent B. anthracis spores, and the immunization partially or completely protected rats from intravenous challenge with anthrax lethal toxin.    In Bacillus licheniformis, alpha-amylase production varied more than 100-fold depending on the presence or absence of a catabolite-repressing carbon source in the growth medium. alpha-Amylase was produced during the growth phase and not at the onset of the stationary phase. Induction of alpha-amylase correlated with synthesis of mRNA initiating at the promoter of the alpha-amylase gene.    The expression of the spoIIA and spoVA sporulation loci of Bacillus subtilis was examined by using DNA-RNA hybridization to detect the time of appearance of their corresponding mRNA molecules in wild-type and asporogenous mutants of B. subtilis. From the size of the mRNA molecules it is clear that both the spoIIA and spoVA loci are polycistronic operons. Neither of the mRNA molecules is polyadenylated. The results also indicate the spoIIA operon is regulated by two promoters which become functional at different times.    We have cloned the early sporulation gene spo0F, which encodes an open reading frame of 124 codons. The putative Spo0F protein derived from this open reading frame, which has been shown to share homology with the Spo0A protein as well as several other regulatory proteins from Escherichia coli, Salmonella typhimurium, and Klebsiella pneumoniae, also shares homology with the E. coli EcoRI methyltransferase. We have shown by S1 nuclease mapping of in vivo transcripts that spo0F is regulated from dual promoters: RNA II was transcribed from an upstream promoter, and RNA I was initated 30 base pairs downstream from RNA II. The promoter sequences for RNA II, but not those for RNA I, conformed to the -10 region consensus sequence for sigma 43 promoters. RNA II was found in low amounts in exponentially growing cells but was not observed in stationary-phase cells, and the presence of RNA II was glucose insensitive. RNA I was found in low amounts in exponentially growing cells, increased three- to fivefold at the end of exponential growth, and remained at this higher level for at least 3 h into stationary phase. RNA I was repressed by glucose during exponential growth but not during stationary phase.    The gluconate (gnt) operon of Bacillus subtilis has been cloned and sequenced. Analysis of the sequence (5482 base pairs) revealed four open reading frames, each of which was preceded by a Shine-Dalgarno sequence. These four frames were designated from the 5&apos;-end as gntR, gntK, gntP, and gntZ. The gntR and gntK genes overlapped by 5 bases. The gntK and gntP gene products (consisting of 513 and 448 amino acids) were identified as gluconate kinase and permease, respectively, by means of insertional inactivation and deletion analysis of these genes subcloned in plasmid pC194. The functions of the gntR and gntZ gene products (243 and 468 amino acids) are presently unknown. S1 nuclease mapping and subcloning in a promoter probe vector (pPL603B) provided evidence that the gnt operon was transcribed as a polycistronic mRNA. Besides the gnt promoter about 40 base pairs upstream of the gntR gene, we detected two overlapping internal promoters between the gntP and gntZ genes. The gnt transcripts terminate about 45 base pairs downstream of the gntZ gene.    Properties of several, well characterized, tetracycline resistance determinants were compared. The determinants in Tn1721 and Tn10 (both from Gram-negative bacteria) each contain two genes; one encodes a repressor that regulates both its own transcription and that of a membrane protein that confers resistance by promoting efflux of the drug. Determinants from Gram-positive bacteria also encode efflux proteins, but expression of resistance is probably regulated by translational attenuation. The likely tetracycline binding site (a common dipeptide) in each efflux protein was predicted. The presence of the common binding site is consistent with the ability of an efflux protein originating in Bacillus species to be expressed in Escherichia coli.    The structural stability of a previously isolated recombinant plasmid pUL720 was examined. pUL720 contains an insert in pBR322 of 23.8 kbp comprising 4 EcoR1 fragments of sizes 12 kbp and 6 kbp, both of which are homologous to the B. subtilis genome, and 5 kbp and 0.8 kbp (of unknown origin). The 12 kbp fragment, which encodes the arginine biosynthesis genes argA-F-cpa, cannot be cloned in isolation in a high copy vector in E. coli but can be inserted into a low copy vector pGV1106 to generate pUL800. Deletion analysis of pUL720 indicated that the 5 kbp and 0.8 kbp fragments were not necessary to maintain plasmid stability. The 6 kbp fragment, when cloned into the EcoR1 site in pACYC184 to generate pUL2030, permitted the cloning in trans in pBR322 of the 12 kbp fragment or subclones containing the instability region. The minimum inhibitory concentration of kanamycin determined in the B. subtilis argC-neo transcriptional fusion pUL730 and expression of the argF gene product, ornithine carbamoyltransferase (OCTase), in pUL800 were reduced by approximately 3 and 2 fold respectively under conditions of arginine excess and in the presence of pUL2030. B. subtilis partial diploids were constructed by transforming parental and arginine hydroxamate resistant (Ahr) mutants with pUL2100, a plasmid generated by inserting the 6 kbp fragment into the integration vector pJH101. The 6 kbp fragment complemented and restored parental type levels of OCTase in ahrC mutants.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    The 2.6 kb kanamycin-resistant (Kmr) plasmid, pRAT11, was constructed using both the replication determinant (repA) region of the 10.8 kb tetracycline-resistant (Tcr) low copy number plasmid pTB52 and another fragment (0.9 kb) that contained solely the Kmr gene of pUB110. The complete nucleotide sequence of this plasmid was determined. The repA region contained a large open reading frame encoding RepA protein (396 amino acid residues). In vitro transcription and translation of the repA gene were confirmed. RepA protein was shown to be indispensable for plasmid replication, and acted in trans on DNA. The part of the repA gene encoding the specific recognition region of the RepA protein was located and contained 3.5 direct repeats of 24 bp (GGTTTCAAAAATGAAACGGTGGAG). Upstream and downstream of the direct repeats were the recognition sequence (TTATCCACA) of the Escherichia coli DnaA protein and an AT-rich region, respectively. The replication control mechanism of the low copy number Bacillus plasmid is discussed.    We report that the ntrB and ntrC proteins of Bradyrhizobium sp. [Parasponia] strain RP501 share homology with other regulatory proteins. There is extensive conservation of C-terminal regions between products of RP501 ntrB; Klebsiella pneumoniae ntrB; Escherichia coli envZ, cpxA, and phoR; Agrobacterium tumefaciens virA; and, to a lesser extent, E. coli cheA. There is also extensive conservation of N-terminal regions between products of RP501 ntrC; K. pneumoniae ntrC; E. coli ompR, sfrA, phoB, cheY and cheB; Salmonella typhimurium cheB and cheY; Bacillus subtilis spoOA and spoOF; and A. tumefaciens virG. We propose that these regulatory genes comprise two-component regulatory systems that evolved from a common ancestral system that involved transduction of information about the status of the environment by one protein domain (the C-terminal regions conserved among ntrB, envZ, etc.) to a second one (the N-terminal region conserved among ntrC, ompR, etc.). The ntrC-set protein then acts upon a specific responding mechanism, typically as a transcriptional activator but also as an effector of the maturation of outer membrane proteins or as a modulator of the direction of flagella rotation.    In Bacillus subtilis, the extracellular enzyme levansurcrase is synthesized in the presence of sucrose. A termination structure between the transcription start site and the structural gene was the apparent site for regulation by sucrose of transcription into the structural gene. Sequence analysis of the sacB leader region from two strains constitutive for levansucrase synthesis showed a single base change in the stem of this termination structure. This single base change also led to the constitutive synthesis of a sacB&apos;-&apos;lacZ fusion, whereas the wild-type sacB&apos;-&apos;lacZ fusion was induced by the addition of sucrose. S1 nuclease mapping of sacB transcripts with probes labeled either within the termination structure or 3&apos; to the termination structure showed that sucrose did not increase the number of transcripts extending into the termination structure; however, sucrose did increase the number of transcripts extending past the termination structure. Two pleiotropic mutations which affect the expression of levansucrase, sacQ36 hyperproducing [sacQ36(Hy)] and sacU32(Hy), were separately introduced into the strain carrying the sacB&apos;-&apos;lacZ fusion. These mutations each increased the expression levels of the sacB&apos;-&apos;lacZ fusion. S1 mapping showed increased levels of transcript initiating at the sacB promoter in strains with the sacQ36(Hy) and sacU32(Hy) mutations. This increased transcription appeared to be independent of the sucrose-regulated transcription termination, suggesting the existence of at least two different mechanisms for the regulation of sacB expression.    Bacillus brevis 47 contains two cell wall proteins termed the outer wall protein (OWP) and middle wall protein (MWP), each of which forms hexagonal arrays in the cell wall. A 6-kilobase BglII-BclI fragment of B. brevis 47 DNA cloned into Bacillus subtilis with a derivative of pHW1 as a vector directed the synthesis of a polypeptide, with almost the same molecular weight as the authentic OWP, as judged by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, which was specifically recognized by the anti-OWP antibody. Nucleotide sequence analysis of the subfragment revealed that it contains two open reading frames in tandem. The upstream truncated open reading frame corresponds to the carboxy-terminal portion of the MWP, and the downstream open reading frame corresponds to the entire translational portion of the OWP. The latter encodes a secretory precursor of the OWP, consisting of a total of 1,004 amino acid residues with a signal peptide of 24 amino acid residues at its amino-terminal end. Futhermore, analysis of transcripts in B. brevis 47 suggests that the MWP and OWP genes, in that order, constitute a cotranscriptional unit and that the major promoter shared by the two genes is located upstream of the MWP gene.    The bacteriophage SPO1-encoded Type II DNA-binding protein, transcription factor 1 (TF1), forms complexes with specific sites in SPO1 DNA. We have investigated the binding of TF1 to one of its preferred sites in which the normal 5-hydroxymethyluracil (hmUra) of SPO1 DNA has been replaced by thymine and have also investigated the binding of a bacterial Type II DNA-binding protein (from Bacillus stearothermophilus) to the hmUra- and thymine-containing forms of the same DNA segment. Our results show that TF1 binds selectively to this high affinity binding site only in hmUra-containing DNA and that the bacterial Type II DNA-binding protein interacts nonspecifically with both forms of DNA.    The in vivo transcription initiation sites of eight putative phi 29 promoters have been accurately determined: seven of them correspond to early promoters, including the four main ones, and the other corresponds to the only late promoter found in vivo. Comparison of the phi 29 promoter sequences with the consensus sequence for the Bacillus subtilis sigma 43 RNA polymerase suggests that the sigma 43 enzyme is involved in the recognition of the viral early promoters, whereas the late promoter sequences share homology with the consensus sequence only at its -10 region.    Transcription of bacteriophage SP01 middle promoters is specifically initiated by a complex of the Bacillus subtilis host&apos;s RNA polymerase core (E) with the SP01 gene 28 transcription-regulating protein, gp28. Normal SP01 DNA contains hydroxymethyluracil (hmUra) in place of thymine and E . gp28 preferentially transcribes hmUra-containing DNA. Hybrid DNA molecules containing an SP01 middle promoter, PM25 . 1, have been constructed in which one DNA strand contains T and the other hmUra. The major feature of these reciprocal hybrid promoters is that one has, predominantly, T substituted for hmUra in the central -35 recognition sequence in the transcribed strand, while the other has, predominantly, T substituted for hmUra in the -10 recognition sequence in the non-transcribed strand. Binding by the E . gp28 RNA polymerase and transcription of these hybrid promoters and of the normal, all-hmUra, promoter have been compared. Both hybrid promoters are weaker than the normal PM25 . 1 promoter, but the hybrid promoter with T substituted in the -10 sequence is the weakest of the set. The DNase I footprint of the normal PM25 . 1 promoter shows temperature-dependent protection of a relatively long stretch of DNA downstream from the transcriptional start site, correlating with a thermal transition of transcriptional activity of promoter complexes. The stronger of the hybrid promoters also undergoes this transition, but the weaker does not. We discuss these findings in terms of protein-DNA interactions determining specificity for a modified nucleotide at this promoter.    A plasmid-borne gene from Bacillus thuringiensis var. israelensis encoding a 27,340 Mr insecticidal delta-endotoxin has been cloned on a bifunctional multicopy plasmid in a wild-type sporogenic strain and two asporogenic mutants of Bacillus subtilis. The delta-endotoxin gene is expressed at a low level during vegetative growth in all three strains, but the synthesis of the toxin increases markedly during the third hour of stationary phase for both the sporogenic strain and an asporogenic mutant containing the OJ lesion. However, in a stage OA mutant, this increase in delta-endotoxin synthesis is not observed. In both the wild-type sporogenic B. subtilis and the asporogenic OJ strain, phase-bright inclusions, resembling the israelensis crystal in appearance, are visible during late stationary phase. The insoluble inclusions from the B. subtilis transformants, consisting solely of the 27,340 Mr polypeptide, were purified by density gradient centrifugation and found to be extremely toxic to Aedes aegypti larvae. After solubilization in alkaline buffer, this polypeptide was also shown to be haemolytic for human erythrocytes and to lyse Aedes albopictus cells with the same LC50 value as native israelensis delta-endotoxin crystals. During stationary phase, novel mRNA species appear in both the wild-type strain and the OJ mutant, but not in the OA mutant, and these appear to be the major gene-specific transcripts. Transcriptional mapping of delta-endotoxin-specific mRNA has shown that the same region of initiation is used at a relatively low level in all three strains during vegetative growth.    The nucleotide sequence of a 1408 base-pair DNA fragment encoding the insecticidal 27,340 Mr delta-endotoxin of Bacillus thuringiensis var. israelensis has been determined by analysis of a recombinant plasmid from Escherichia coli. The hydropathy plot of the protein shows it to be highly hydrophobic, consistent with a postulated cytolytic mechanism of action for the toxin. In addition, the delta-endotoxin transcriptional start points that are used in B. thuringiensis and an E. coli recombinant have been determined. In B. thuringiensis var. israelensis, transcription initiates from a single start point, and gene-specific transcripts are not observed before stage II of sporulation. This is the stage at which delta-endotoxin antigen is first detected, indicating that control of expression is primarily at the transcriptional level for this protein. Analysis of gene-specific transcription in E. coli indicates that at least three start points are utilized in this organism. Interestingly, the highest level of delta-endotoxin mRNA is seen during mid-exponential growth of E. coli and the level appears to decrease as the cells enter the stationary phase of growth.    The trp operon regulatory region of Bacillus pumilus was cloned and sequenced. The cloned B. pumilus trp promoter-leader region functioned in Bacillus subtilis to express the adjacent leukocyte interferon A gene on a multicopy transcriptional fusion plasmid, pBpIFI. In strains carrying this plasmid, anthranilate synthetase levels were elevated, possible due to titration of a B. subtilis trp regulatory factor by multiple copies of the transcript of the plasmid-borne B. pumilus trp leader region. The B. pumilus trp promoter was recognized efficiently in vitro by B. subtilis sigma 43 RNA polymerase. Approximately 12% of the transcripts produced in vitro terminated in the leader region immediately following synthesis of a transcript structure resembling rho-independent terminators of enteric bacteria. An analogous terminator exists in the B. subtilis trp leader transcript. Nucleotide sequence comparison of the B. pumilus and B. subtilis trp leader regions revealed conservation of these and other sequences that could form transcript secondary structures postulated to regulate transcription termination in B. subtilis (H. Shimotsu, M.I. Kuroda, C. Yanofsky, and D.J. Henner, J. Bacteriol. 166:461-471, 1986). We propose that two elements implicated in B. subtilis trp operon regulation are conserved in the related organism B. pumilus: alternative transcription antiterminator and terminator structures in the leader transcript, and a trans-acting factor present in limiting amounts that is required for transcription termination in the leader region.    We show, using dot matrix comparisons and statistical analysis of sequence alignments, that seven sequenced sigma factors, E. coli sigma-70 and sigma-32, B. subtilis sigma-43 and sigma-29, phage SP01 gene products 28 and 34, and phage T4 gene product 55, comprise a homologous family of proteins. Sigma-70, sigma-32, and sigma-43 each have two copies of a sequence similar to the helix-turn-helix DNA binding motif seen in CRP, and lambda repressor and cro proteins. B. subtilis sigma-29, SP01 gp28, and SP01 gp34 have at least one copy similar to this sequence. We propose that a second sequence, conserved in all seven proteins is the core RNA polymerase binding site. A third region, present only in sigma-70 and sigma-43, may also be involved in interaction with core. Available mutational evidence supports our model for sigma factor structure.    Analysis of Clostridium pasteurianum genomic DNA indicates that the ferredoxin (Fd) gene is present in a single copy. The cloned Fd gene previously described (Graves, M.C., Mullenbach, G. T., and Rabinowitz, J. C. (1985) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 82, 1653-1657) was used to map in vivo and in vitro synthesized Fd transcripts. The in vivo mRNA was sized in two ways: by Northern hybridization analysis, and more directly from the known DNA sequence after the 5&apos;- and 3&apos;-termini were identified. The 5&apos;-end was determined by primer extension-dideoxy sequencing and the 3&apos;-end by S1 nuclease mapping. The monocistronic Fd mRNA contains about 255 nucleotides and, thus, is one of the shortest bacterial mRNAs yet described. We also examined the Fd transcripts produced by Escherichia coli transformed with the plasmid containing the Fd gene. E. coli RNA polymerase most likely recognizes the same promoter (P1) as the clostridial polymerase, and furthermore, efficiently uses an additional promoter (P2) that is poorly recognized by the normal host enzyme. For comparison, in vitro transcripts were generated by E. coli and Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerases. In vitro, only promoter P1 is used by either E. coli or B. subtilis RNA polymerase. The 3&apos;-end of each of the four types of transcripts occurs essentially at the same location and maps to within a large dyad symmetry element. Comparison of the Fd promoter with other Gram-positive promoters reveals that some sequences outside of the traditional Pribnow and -35 regions are conserved. This analysis indicates that an &quot;extended&quot; promoter recognition site may be required in these organisms.    The Bacillus subtilis gene (pyrB), which encodes aspartate transcarbamylase (ATCase), was cloned on a HindIII restriction endonuclease fragment inserted into the pUC13 plasmid vector. B. subtilis pyrB was expressed in Escherichia coli, as judged by complementation of E. coli pyrB mutants and production of enzyme that was specifically inhibited by antibody directed against B. subtilis ATCase. The extent of expression was strongly dependent on the orientation of the inserted DNA in the vector, which suggested that transcription was initiated from vector-borne (rather than B. subtilis) promoters. The entire 1098-base pair HindIII fragment of B. subtilis DNA was sequenced by the Maxam-Gilbert method. The amino acid sequence of B. subtilis ATCase was deduced from a 305-codon open reading frame and agreed very well with analyses of the purified enzyme. Comparison of the sequence of B. subtilis ATCase with that of E. coli ATCase catalytic subunit, for which the three-dimensional structure is known, revealed many homologous residues of probable importance in catalysis and structural folding of ATCases. The significance of homology to E. coli ornithine transcarbamylases was also analyzed. The sequences of the 5&apos; and 3&apos; flanking regions to pyrB encode open reading frames in both cases which overlap with pyrB by eight and six codons, respectively. It is probable that these open reading frames encode other enzymes of a coordinately regulated unit. The sequence 5&apos; to pyrB also encodes an mRNA bearing a pyrimidine-rich sequence followed by a typical sequence for a rho-independent transcription terminator. The presence of these elements and the 5&apos; open reading frame suggest that B. subtilis pyrB, like E. coli pyrBI, is regulated by an attenuation mechanism.    Bacillus subtilis subtilisin is predicted to be synthesized as a preproenzyme according to the sequence analysis of its gene. We have synthesized the [35S] methionine-labeled preprosubtilisin in vitro and processed the precursor to prosubtilisin by the addition of membrane vesicles derived from vegetative cells of B. subtilis and Triton X-100. Radiosequencing of the prosubtilisin allowed the precise determination of the signal peptidase cleavage site. The preprosubtilisin was found to have a 29-amino-acid-long signal peptide with the signal peptidase cleavage sequence of AlaGln-AlaAla. Fusion of the signal peptide sequence to the mature TEM beta-lactamase structural gene allowed the production of an active and secreted form of beta-lactamase in vivo. An N-terminal sequence analysis of this product indicated that the observed in vivo signal peptidase cleavage site was exactly the same as that determined by in vitro analysis. During the development of the in vitro processing system, we demonstrated that the replacement of the subtilisin transcription regulatory sequence by a vegetative promoter allowed the vegetative expression and secretion of subtilisin. Thus, the late expression of the native subtilisin gene is mainly controlled at the transcription level and the secretion/processing systems are available for vegetative production of subtilisin.    The bacteriophage SPO1 gene 28-encoded protein, gp28, directs specific recognition of viral middle promoters in hydroxymethyluracil-containing DNA by the Bacillus subtilis host&apos;s RNA polymerase core. Using appropriately sensitive methods of detection, we have shown that discrimination against thymine-containing DNA is not absolute and that the gp28-containing RNA polymerase precisely initiates transcription at two thymine-containing SPO1 middle promoters.    The 5&apos; non-coding region of the tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase gene (tyrS) of Bacillus stearothermophilus is 324 nucleotides long. It contains a premature terminator and a strong promoter: these were identified in vitro by RNA run-off experiments and in Escherichia coli by construction of specific mutants. The terminator consists of a stem and loop structure followed by the string of T residues characteristic of rho-independent termination. This is preceded by another stem and loop structure which may permit the formation of an anti-terminator. Neither the promoter nor the premature terminator appears to be regulated by the tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase in vitro or in E. coli.    A DNA region of 2.8 X 10(3) base pairs (2.8 kb) upstream of the Bacillus amyloliquefaciens alpha-amylase gene has been isolated. This DNA gave rise to a 2.2-kb transcript. The 3&apos; end of the transcript was mapped with S1 nuclease and shown to terminate 49 base pairs upstream of the -35 region of the alpha-amylase promoter. In B. subtilis minicells this 2.2-kb transcript coded for three different polypeptides, thus indicating a polycistronic operon-type structure. The location and the order of the polypeptides were established using DNA deletions. The joining of the 2.2-kb operon to the downstream alpha-amylase gene in the plasmid pUB110 did not have any significant effect on the level of expression of the alpha-amylase.    An inverted repeat structure from Bacillus natto preceding the Bacillus subtilis alpha-amylase gene has been suggested to be responsible for the enhancement of alpha-amylase production [Yamazaki et al. (1983) J. Bacteriol. 156, 327-337]. A similar inverted repeat region has also been found upstream from the Bacillus amyloliquefaciens alpha-amylase gene and shown to function as a transcription termination signal of an upstream operon of 2.2 X 10(3) bases (2.2 kb) (Kallio et al., following paper in this journal). The removal of this DNA region reduced the level of alpha-amylase production by 70% and led to concomitant formation of a readthrough transcript arising from the promoter of the 2.2-kb operon. To test whether the readthrough transcript affected the alpha-amylase production, the promoter of the 2.2-kb operon was removed from plasmid constructions carrying either intact or deleted inverted repeat sequences. When cultures carrying the above plasmids were assayed for alpha-amylase activity, both constructions produced equal amounts of alpha-amylase. Thus, the inverted repeat structure preceding the alpha-amylase promoter does not, as such, enhance the alpha-amylase production. Instead, its presence prevents the inhibition of alpha-amylase expression caused by the readthrough transcripts from the upstream promoter.    DNA from Clostridium acetobutylicum ABKn8 was partially digested with Sau3A and the fragments obtained were inserted into the unique BamHI site of the cloning vector pHV33. The recombinant plasmids were used to transform Escherichia coli HB101 with selection for ampicillin resistance. A collection of ampicillin-resistant, tetracycline-sensitive clones representative of the Clostridium acetobutylicum genome was made. The clones were shown to carry recombinant plasmids each containing an insert of 2 to 16 kb in size. Several of them complemented the HB101 proA2 or leuB6 auxotrophic mutations. The cloned sequences were shown by Southern blot hybridization to be homologous to the corresponding ABKn8 DNA fragments.    The gene coding for the Bacillus subtilis extracellular neutral protease was isolated from strain BGSC 1A341, an overproducer carrying the nprR2 region, and from strain 168, a normal producer with the nprR1 sequence. The sequence of about 600 nucleotides upstream from the start codon of the protease gene was determined for both strains. The two regions are highly homologous except for a stretch of 66 base pairs close to the promoter region, which is absent in the BGSC 1A341 gene. Northern blot analysis of the in vivo RNAs indicated that the different levels of enzyme secreted by the two strains were due to different amounts of transcripts that accumulated in the cells. Furthermore, at the end of exponential growth, the amount of transcript increased dramatically in the overproducer strain but remained approximately constant in the normal producer strain. The start point(s) for transcription, however, as determined by S1 nuclease mapping of the in vivo transcripts, appeared to be the same for both genes.    The Bacillus subtilis veg promotor site was shown to be composed of two neighboring RNA polymerase binding sites, only one of which (&quot;Site I&quot;) produces a transcript. The relationship between these sites has been investigated following insertion of ten base pairs of DNA between the sites and subsequent cloning of each site independent of the other, and deletion of DNA sequences upstream from the productive site. The effect of DNA insertion was to permit transcription initiation from the previously nonproductive Site II, in either the presence or absence of Site I. This could be attributed to insertion of a purine residue seven base pairs downstream from the Pribnow box of Site II. Transcription from Site I was slightly increased in the presence of Site II in cis, but was still efficient in the absence of Site II, indicating that there is no absolute dependence on Site II for in vitro transcription from Site I.    sigma 37 is a minor species of RNA polymerase sigma factor found in the Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis. sigma 37 governs the transcription in vitro of genes that are turned on at an early stage in spore formation, as well as other genes that are switched on at the end of the exponential phase of growth but that are not under sporulation control. To study the role of sigma 37 in B. subtilis gene expression, we have cloned the gene for this minor species of sigma factor in Escherichia coli by using as a hybridization probe a synthetic oligonucleotide that was designed on the basis of the NH2-terminal amino acid sequence of sigma 37 protein. We determined the nucleotide sequence of the entire sigma 37 gene, which was found to encode a 262-amino acid residue polypeptide of 29.9 kDa. The predicted amino acid sequence of sigma 37 showed significant homology to that of other sigma proteins in a region that has been proposed to be the site of binding of these factors to core RNA polymerase. Genetic mapping experiments placed the gene for sigma 37, herein designated sigB, at 40 degrees on the genetic map of Piggot and Hoch [Piggot, P. &amp; Hoch, J. A. (1985) Microbiol. Rev. 49, 158-179]. An insertion mutation was constructed in sigB and found not to impair growth or sporulation.    A Bacillus subtilis 2.7-kilobase DNA fragment containing an intracellular protease gene was cloned into Escherichia coli. The transformants produced an intracellular protease of approximately 35,000 Mr whose activity was inhibited by both phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and EDTA. Introduction of the fragment on a multicopy vector, pUB110, into B. subtilis caused a marked increase in the level of the intracellular protease. The nucleotide sequence of the cloned fragment showed the presence of an open reading frame for a possible proenzyme of the major intracellular serine protease (ISP-I) of B. subtilis with an NH2-terminal 17- or 20-amino-acid extension. The total amino acid sequence of the protease deduced from the nucleotide sequence showed considerable homology with that of an extracellular serine protease, subtilisin. The transcriptional initiation site of the ISP-I gene was identified by nuclease S1 mapping. No typical conserved sequence for promoters was found upstream of the open reading frame. An ISP-I-negative mutant of B. subtilis was constructed by integration of artificially deleted gene into the chromosome. The mutant sporulated normally in a nutritionally rich medium but showed decreased sporulation in a synthetic medium. The chloramphenicol resistance determinant of a plasmid integrated at the ISP-I locus was mapped by PBS1 transduction and was found to be closely linked to metC (99.5%).    Expression of beta-galactosidase by Bacillus subtilis strains carrying transcriptional fusions of the glnA promoter region to the Escherichia coli lacZ gene was found to be regulated by the nitrogen source in glnA+ strains. The pattern of regulation was the same as that for glutamine synthetase (GS); the strongest repression was seen when glutamine was present in the medium. To see this regulation it was necessary for the fusion to be in low copy number, a condition achieved by forcing integration into the chromosome. We constructed a strain carrying a deletion mutation (glnA200) that removes part of the 5&apos; end of the glnA structural gene. This strain did not produce any detectable GS activity or measurable GS antigen. We introduced this mutation and other glnA mutations (glnA73, glnA93, and glnA100) into strains carrying glnA-lacZ fusions. When the strains were grown with glutamine as the nitrogen source, beta-galactosidase activity was found to be derepressed. These results indicate that functional glnA gene product is required for the regulation of transcription from the glnA promoter. This supports the conclusion of our previous studies of the B. subtilis glnA gene cloned in E. coli. Additional factors may also be involved in glnA control. In particular, our results suggest that a 500-base-pair sequence of DNA between the promoter region and the start of the glnA structural gene plays a role in regulation; strains carrying this region within the glnA-lacZ fusion and unable to produce functional GS exhibited only partially derepressed beta-galactosidase levels when grown in the presence of glutamine.    The phi 29 DNA in vitro transcription initiation sites have been accurately mapped by S1 protection experiments. The results obtained indicated that the B. subtilis RNA polymerase containing the sigma 43 subunit basically recognized the same set of phi 29 promoters in vitro as those used in vivo. In addition, the sequence of the phi 29 early A2a promoter used both in vitro and in vivo has been determined as well as the precise nucleotide where initiation of transcription from the C2 promoter occurs in vitro.    cat-86 is a plasmid gene specifying chloramphenicol-inducible chloramphenicol acetyltransferase activity in Bacillus subtilis. Inducibility has been suggested to result primarily from activation of the translation of cat-86 mRNA by subinhibitory levels of chloramphenicol. To directly test the involvement of transcription in cat-86 induction, the gene was transcriptionally activated with a strong promoter, resulting in the synthesis of relatively high levels of cat-86 mRNA in uninduced cells. When RNA synthesis was blocked with rifampin (100 micrograms/ml), de novo inducibility of cat-86 by chloramphenicol could be demonstrated for more than 30 min. These results indicate that concurrent transcription is not essential for cat-86 induction. Accordingly, cat-86 is one of only a few inducible bacterial genes in which the primary form of regulation is at the translational level. This form of regulation may apply to other cat genes of Gram-positive origin whose expression is also inducible by chloramphenicol.    The nucleotide sequence of the bgaB gene, which encodes the thermostable beta-galactosidase I of Bacillus stearothermophilus, and its flanking region was determined. A 2,016-base-pair open reading frame observed was concluded to be for beta-galactosidase I (Mr 78,051) from observations that the amino acid composition of the enzyme and the sequence of 14 amino acids from the amino-terminus of the enzyme coincided with those deduced from this open frame. A 107-base-pair HaeIII-AluI fragment just upstream of the estimated Shine-Dalgarno sequence of the bgaB gene had promoter activity toward cat-86 (chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene) and produced the enzyme at a level equivalent to 7% of the total cellular protein of B. subtilis. From the base sequence of this DNA region and the transcriptional start site determined by S1 nuclease mapping, the -35 and -10 sequences are estimated to be TTGACA and TAATTT, respectively, which are similar to the consensus sequence of B. subtilis sigma 43 RNA polymerase.    The transcriptional and translational initiation signals of a portion of the Staphylococcus aureus plasmid pUB110 were analyzed. An Mbo I-Pvu II fragment was sequenced and the site of transcriptional initiation was determined by in vitro mapping. To convert the plasmid into a cloning vector, a multilinker was introduced in different positions relative to a detected reading frame. The Gram-negative beta-galactosidase gene and the Gram-positive chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (cat) gene were fused and the level of expression was determined in Bacillus subtilis. Hybrid proteins consisting of corresponding CAT polypeptides were produced in each translational reading frame. Therefore this vector system can be used to express cloned DNA in the Gram-positive host Bacillus subtilis. Furthermore a derived lacZ fusion plasmid may be used for rapid screening of inserts.    The expression of the blaP gene for the beta-lactamase of Bacillus licheniformis was examined by transcriptional analyses. Radiolabeled probes containing the blaP gene or various regions 3&apos; or 5&apos; to it were used to analyze RNA samples prepared from induced and uninduced cultures of wild-type and mutant B. licheniformis strains. The level of blaP mRNA was low in uninduced wild-type cells. At 37 degrees C, blaP mRNA levels reached a maximum 1 h after induction while rising up to 180-fold and then declined, but remained severalfold above the uninduced level for several hours. The rate of beta-lactamase synthesis was roughly proportional to the levels of blaP mRNA in both wild-type and mutant strains, indicating that regulation of beta-lactamase formation occurs primarily at the level of transcription. Turnover of blaP mRNA in the presence of rifampin was rapid, giving a blaP mRNA half-life of about 2 min. Yet, high levels of blaP mRNA were maintained for at least 1 h after removal of free inducer. Three blaP mRNAs of 1.2, 2.9, and 3.4 kilobases were produced from the blaP promoter. The most abundant made up about 97% of all blaP transcripts and was also the smallest, ending at a transcriptional terminator located about 60 bases 3&apos; to the blaP structural gene. Variables such as incubation temperature, cytotoxicity of inducer, and type of strain had essentially no effect on the ratio of large blaP mRNA to total blaP mRNA. The 2.9- and 3.4-kilobase blaP mRNAs identify potential locations of genetically linked regulators of beta-lactamase synthesis.    The gene coding for Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase major sigma 43, rpoD, was cloned together with its neighboring genes in a 7 kb EcoRI fragment. The complete nucleotide sequence of a 5 kb fragment including the entire rpoD gene revealed the presence of two other genes preceding rpoD in the order P23-dnaE-rpoD. The dnaE codes for DNA primase while the function of P23 remains unknown. The three genes reside in an operon that is similar in organization to the E. coli RNA polymerase major sigma 70 operon, which is composed of genes encoding small ribosome protein S21 (rpsU), DNA primase (dnaG), and RNA polymerase sigma 70 (rpoD). There is a relatively high degree of base and amino acid homology between the DNA primase and sigma genes. The most significant differences between the two operons are observed in the molecular size of the first genes (P23 and rpsU), the complete lack of amino acid homology between P23 and S21, the molecular weights of the two rpoD genes, the size of the intercistronic region between the first two genes, and the regulatory elements of the operon.    The sequence of the cloned Bacillus amyloliquefaciens subtilisin gene suggested that this secreted serine protease is produced as a larger precursor, designated preprosubtilisin [Wells, J. A., Ferrari, E., Henner, D. J., Estell, D. A. &amp; Chen, E. Y. (1983) Nucleic Acids Res. 11, 7911-7925]. Biochemical evidence presented here shows that a subtilisin precursor is produced in Bacillus subtilis hosts. The precursor is first localized in the cell membrane, reaching a steady-state level of approximately equal to 1000 sites per cell. Mutations in the subtilisin gene that alter a catalytically critical residue (i.e., aspartate +32----asparagine), or delete the carboxyl-terminal portion of the enzyme that contains catalytically critical residues, block the maturation of this precursor. This block occurs when these mutant genes are expressed in B. subtilis hosts where the chromosomal subtilisin gene has been deleted. When the mutant B. amyloliquefaciens subtilisins are expressed in B. subtilis hosts that contain an intact chromosomal subtilisin gene, the mutant precursors are processed to a mature form and released to the medium. Such processing, in trans, of the precursor is also demonstrated in vitro by addition of active subtilisin. Thus, the release of subtilisin from the cell membrane is dependent on an autoproteolytic process that appears to be novel among secreted proteins.    We have determined the DNA sequence of the two adjacent genes for the alpha and beta chains of tryptophan synthase in Pseudomonas aeruginosa, along with 34 5&apos;-flanking and 799 3&apos;-flanking base pairs. The gene order is trpBA as predicted from earlier genetic studies, and the two cistrons overlap by 4 bp; a ribosome binding site for the second gene is evident in the coding sequence of the first gene. We have also determined the location of three large deletions eliminating portions of each gene. A detailed comparison of the deduced P. aeruginosa amino acid sequence with those published for E. coli, Bacillus subtilis, and Saccharomyces cerevisiae shows much similarity throughout the beta and most of the alpha subunit. Most of the residues implicated by chemical modification or mutation as being critical for enzymatic activity are conserved, along with many others, suggesting that three-dimensional structure has remained largely constant during evolution. We also report the construction of a recombinant plasmid that overproduces a slightly modified alpha subunit from P. aeruginosa that can form a functionally effective multimer with normal E. coli beta 2 subunit in vivo.    In order to obtain the recombinant Bacillus subtilis strain, a transcriptional-translational control unit of the alpha-amylase gene of B. amyloliquefaciens was synthesized. The oligodeoxyribonucleotides were prepared by the modified triester method in solution and by the solid-phase approach. Then these oligonucleotides were joined by DNA ligase into two fragments which were cloned in the phage M13mp9 DNA and the plasmid pBR327. A plasmid harboring the site regulating the transcription of the alpha-amylase gene may be employed as vector for cloning the promoter-containing fragments in E. coli cells.    A positive retroregulator that enhances the expression of an upstream gene(s) has been identified. It resides within a 381-base pair (bp) restriction fragment containing the transcriptional terminator of the crystal protein (cry) gene from Bacillus thuringiensis vs. Kurstaki HD-1. This fragment was fused to the distal ends of either the penicillinase (penP) gene of Bacillus licheniformis or the interleukin 2 cDNA from the human Jurkat cell line. In both cases, the half-lives of the mRNAs derived from the fusion genes were increased from approximately equal to 2 to 6 min in both Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis. Synthesis of the corresponding polypeptides in the bacteria carrying the fusion genes was also increased correspondingly. The enhancement of expression of the upstream genes was independent of the insertional orientation of the distal cry terminator fragment. Deletion analysis showed that the locus conferring the enhancing activity coincided with the terminator sequence and was located within a 89-bp fragment that includes an inverted repeat, the 19-bp upstream-, and the 27-bp downstream-flanking sequences. We propose that transcription of the retroregulator sequence leads to the incorporation of the corresponding stem-and-loop structure at the 3&apos; end of the mRNA; the presence of this structure protects the mRNAs from exonucleolytic degradation from the 3&apos; end and, thereby, increases the mRNA half-life and enhances protein synthesis of the target genes.    As a means of determining the function of sigma 29, a sporulation-essential sigma factor, we have isolated and begun to characterize genes that require sigma 29 for their expression. RNA transcribed in vitro from total Bacillus subtilis DNA by using sigma 29-containing RNA polymerase (E-sigma-29) was hybridized to a bank of B. subtilis DNA fragments that had been cloned into bacteriophage lambda. Approximately 0.25% of the cloned B. subtilis DNA fragments displayed detectable hybridization with our RNA probe. Five DNA fragments that had strong in vitro template activity for E-sigma-29 were selected for further study. The DNA fragments which contained in vitro sigma 29 promoter activity encoded RNAs that were synthesized by B. subtilis during sporulation. Mutant B. subtilis that failed to synthesize sigma 29 (spoIIA, spoIIE) made less RNA that could hybridize to these cloned DNAs than did a mutant (spoIIC) which did synthesize sigma 29 but was blocked at a similar stage in development. A detailed analysis of several of the cloned DNAs demonstrated that they encoded RNAs that were transcribed from approximately the same start site in vivo that E-sigma-29 initiated transcription in vitro. These particular transcripts were present only during the period of sigma-29 abundance (2 to 4 h after the onset of sporulation) in sporulating cells which carried a wild-type allele of the sigma-29 structural gene (spoIIG). We conclude that the isolation procedure used in this study identified genes that are transcribed by E-sigma 29, not only in vitro but also in vivo.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    Three Bacillus subtilis genes (termed sspA, sspB, and sspD) which code for small, acid-soluble spore proteins (SASPs) have been cloned, and their complete nucleotide sequence has been determined. The amino acid sequences of the SASPs coded for by these genes are similar to each other and to those of the SASP-1 of B. subtilis (coded for by the sspC gene) and the SASP-A/C family of B. megaterium. The sspA and sspB genes are expressed only in sporulation, in parallel with each other and with the sspC gene. Two regions upstream of the postulated transcription start sites for the sspA and B genes have significant homology with the analogous regions of the sspC gene and the SASP-A/C gene family. Purification of two of the three major B, subtilis SASPs (alpha and beta) and determination of their amino-terminal sequences indicated that the sspA gene codes for SASP-alpha and that the sspB gene codes for SASP-beta. This was confirmed by the introduction of deletion mutations into the cloned sspA and sspB genes and transfer of these deletions into the B. subtilis chromosome with concomitant loss of the wild-type gene.    Transcription of the trp operon of Bacillus subtilis is regulated in response to the availability of tryptophan. The first structural gene of the operon is preceded by a 204-base-pair transcribed leader region that contains a segment with the features of a procaryotic termination site. Transcription of the leader region was analyzed in vivo and in vitro to determine whether this putative termination site was used to regulate operon expression. When RNA was isolated from wild-type cells grown in the presence of excess tryptophan, transcripts of the operon ended at the putative termination site. In contrast, RNA isolated from cells grown in the absence of tryptophan or from a mutant strain which is constitutive for trp operon expression contained trp transcripts that extended beyond the termination site into the structural genes. To assess termination quantitatively in vivo, a trpE-lacZ fusion was constructed in which the trp promoter and leader region controls hybrid beta-galactosidase formation. The effects on hybrid beta-galactosidase levels of point mutations and deletions introduced into this leader region were determined. The results obtained establish that transcription of the trp operon structural genes is regulated in the leader region. This regulation appears to be mediated by the formation of alternative secondary structures of the leader transcript. In vitro transcription studies with wild-type and mutant templates provided additional evidence that the identified alternative RNA secondary structures regulate transcription termination. We hypothesize that binding of a tryptophan-activated regulatory protein to a specific segment of the nascent leader transcript prevents formation of one of the alternative secondary structures, thereby directing RNA polymerase to terminate transcription.    Cloned DNA from Bacillus megaterium can complement mutants in the Escherichia coli proton-translocating ATPase. DNA from the E. coli unc operon, which codes for the ATPase, was used in hybridization experiments to probe for homologous DNA in the Gram-positive sporulating bacterium Bacillus megaterium. Such DNA was identified and subsequently cloned into pBR322. In an E. coli in vitro transcription-translation system, the resultant plasmid directed the synthesis of a 52,000 Mr polypeptide which could be precipitated with antiserum to the E. coli F1-ATPase. This plasmid was also capable of complementing E. coli uncA and uncD mutants, defective in the alpha and beta subunits of the ATPase, respectively. Therefore, the cloned B. megaterium DNA carries the genes for the alpha and beta subunits, and perhaps for other subunits, of the proton-translocating ATPase of B. megaterium. These bacillus subunits can be synthesized and assembled in vivo into a functional hybrid E. coli-B. megaterium ATPase.    An 85 bp DNA fragment, the nucleotide sequence of which had 84% homology with the sequence for the promoter, ribosome binding site and NH2-terminal five amino acids of the Bacillus amyloliquefaciens alpha-amylase gene, was chemically synthesized. In order to analyze the promoter activity of a Bacillus subtilis alpha-amylase secretion vector, the fragment was inserted between the promoter and signal peptide-coding region of Bacillus subtilis alpha-amylase gene. Both promoters, tandemly repeated, functioned in transcribing the B. subtilis alpha-amylase signal peptide-coding region followed by the Escherichia coli beta-lactamase structural gene. The transcription initiation sites were determined by the primer extension method. The extracellular production of beta-lactamase was stimulated by two promoters as compared with that by the plasmids containing either promoter region alone. The change of two amino acids in the NH2-terminal region of the B. subtilis alpha-amylase signal peptide had no effect on the secretion of beta-lactamase from B. subtilis cells.    A cloned DNA segment from Bacillus subtilis containing 21 tRNA genes was introduced into Escherichia coli. In the B. subtilis genome, these tRNA genes are located after an rRNA gene set and before tandem terminators. The rRNA and tRNA genes are thought to represent a single transcriptional unit. However, another putative promoter occurs after the second tRNA gene within the tRNA gene cluster and has a sequence compatible with both the major B. subtilis (sigma 43 type) promoter and the major E. coli promoter. The B. subtilis 21-tRNA-gene cluster was introduced into E. coli to see whether this promoter would be recognized in E. coli, to determine the start point of transcription in the E. coli system, and to see whether mature B. subtilis tRNAs would be transcribed and processed in E. coli. Expression was evaluated by monitoring levels of aminoacylation of mature tRNAs extracted from E. coli containing plasmids with or without the B. subtilis tRNA genes and by examining profiles of isoaccepting species on columns of RPC-5. S1 nuclease mapping was performed to define the starting point for transcription. The results indicated that a putative promoter located within the B. subtilis tRNA gene region was functional when cloned into E. coli and that it initiated at the same nucleotide as it does in B. subtilis. In addition, at least some B. subtilis tRNA genes could be transcribed and processed in E. coli to mature tRNAs capable of accepting an amino acid.    A DNA fragment from Bacillus natto IFO3936 has been cloned which enhances the production of both extracellular alkaline and neutral proteases in Bacillus subtilis. The DNA sequence analysis around the gene responsible for the hyperproduction, prtR, revealed one open reading frame (comprising 60 amino acid residues) which was bounded by potential transcriptional and translational regulatory signals in its preceding and following regions. This open reading frame was not homologous to the published sequences of the structural genes of the two proteases. The calculated molecular weight (7,109) of the polypeptide predicted from the DNA sequence is much smaller than those of the two proteases, indicating that the gene product is distinct from those enzymes. In-frame fusion between the N-terminal region of the coding sequence and the lacZ gene of Escherichia coli demonstrated that the coding region was indeed translated in vivo. By deletion analysis it was suggested that prtR was the structural gene for the 60-amino-acid polypeptide. Cells carrying a prtR plasmid secreted both proteases 40 to 400 times more than the cells carrying the vector alone. Furthermore, it was found that prtR also enhanced the production of levansucrase by 1 or 2 orders of magnitude. There was no difference, however, in the amount of the other extracellular enzymes such as alpha-amylase, RNase, and alkaline phosphatase. These results indicate that prtR is specific for the hyperproduction of the proteases and levansucrase.    Subtilisin expression as a function of growth and sporulation was determined using a presubtilisin-beta-galactosidase gene fusion. An approximately 500-base-pair region upstream of the subtilisin gene and including the first eight codons of the presubtilisin protein was fused at the eighth codon of beta-galactosidase in the integrative vector pJF751. This gene fusion does not carry a signal sequence, and therefore its synthesis is uncoupled from maturation of presubtilisin. The fusion protein gene was integrated into a variety of recipient strains to test for the effect of various mutations on the initial rate of presubtilisin-beta-galactosidase synthesis. Among the spo0 mutations tested, the spo0A mutations showed a strong, 10-fold decrease in the rate of beta-galactosidase synthesis. This effect of the spo0A mutations was not evident when the presubtilisin-beta-galactosidase fusion was present on a multicopy plasmid. The sacU mutation, which was known to increase the extracellular level of levansucrase and proteases, was found to increase the synthesis of the presubtilisin-beta-galactosidase gene fusions 7-fold, and the hpr mutations were shown to increase the rate of presubtilisin-beta-galactosidase gene fusions 17-fold, indicating that these mutations influence either transcription or translation of the presubtilisin gene. However, the effect of these mutations was only observed in the stationary phase of growth, indicating they did not render synthesis constitutive. By using multicopy plasmids and an integrated gene fusion, it was shown that there is likely to be a titratable repressor controlling subtilisin synthesis.    After the Bacillus subtilis nucleoid was dissected with restriction endonucleases, a specific DNA sequence from the purA region was isolated in a particulate form that probably originated from the cell membrane. Precise definition of the binding region within this sequence was achieved by a novel procedure based on a previously reported observation that additional copies of the binding region, introduced into the chromosome using an integrative plasmid, were also predominantly particle bound. Subsections of the original plasmid insertion were cloned into the integrative plasmid and introduced into B. subtilis, in which they became tandemly reiterated under appropriate selective conditions. HaeIII sites in the vector, flanking each insertion, were used to excise the latter for subsequent tests of particle association. Examination of 10 strains containing subsections of the original 5.2-kilobase-pair region showed that the binding region was confined to 283 base pairs. This was confirmed by dissection in vitro of a larger, isolated, particle-bound sequence. The nucleotide sequence of a 1,300-base-pair region that contained this site was determined. The entire region had a notably high A + T content and was deficient in open reading frames for transcription.    Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. kurstaki total DNA was digested with BglII and cloned into the BamHI site of plasmid pUC9 in Escherichia coli. A recombinant plasmid, pHBHE, expressed a protein of 135,000 daltons that was toxic to caterpillars. A HincII-SmaI double digest of pHBHE was then ligated to BglII-cut plasmid pBD64 and introduced into Bacillus subtilis by transformation. The transformants were identified by colony hybridization and confirmed by Southern blot hybridization. A 135,000-dalton protein which bound to an antibody specific for the crystal protein of B. thuringiensis was detected from the B. subtilis clones containing the toxin gene insert in either orientation. A toxin gene insert cloned into a PvuII site distal from the two drug resistance genes of the pBD64 vector also expressed a 135,000-dalton protein. These results suggest that the toxin gene is transcribed from its own promoter. Western blotting of proteins expressed at various stages of growth revealed that the crystal protein expression in B. subtilis begins early in the vegetative phase, while in B. thuringiensis it is concomitant with the onset of sporulation. The cloned genes when transferred to a nonsporulating strain of B. subtilis also expressed a 135,000-dalton protein. These results suggest that toxin gene expression in B. subtilis is independent of sporulation. Another toxin gene encoding a 130,000- to 135,000-dalton protein was cloned in E. coli from a library of B. thuringiensis genes established in lambda 1059. This gene was then subcloned in B. subtilis. The cell extracts from both clones were toxic to caterpillars. Electron microscope studies revealed the presence of an irregular crystal inclusion in E. coli and a well-formed bipyramidal crystal in B. subtilis clones similar to the crystals found in B. thuringiensis.    The sacQ gene of Bacillus subtilis, a pleiotropic gene affecting the expression of a number of secreted gene products, has been identified as a small 46-amino-acid polypeptide. The increased expression of this polypeptide in strains carrying the sacQ36 allele, or in strains carrying the sacQ gene on a high copy plasmid, appears to be responsible for the phenotype of higher levels of proteases seen in these strains. A deletion of the sacQ gene had no apparent phenotype, indicating that it is not an essential gene.    The replication control mechanism of Bacillus plasmid pRBH1 was analysed; pRBH1 contains four promoters, P1 to P4, and a large inverted repeat (63 base pairs) upstream of the protein (RepB) coding sequence. The stem and loop structure is surrounded by two promoters, P1 and P3, with different directions of transcription. One base substitution in the loop structure caused a change in copy number. Since the P1 promoter is located upstream of the replication origin of pRBH1, the transcript from the P1 promoter might serve as the primer of DNA replication. In vivo transcription from the P1 promoter was repressed by a trans-acting plasmid gene product. Since the RepB protein is involved in copy number control and RepB contains the consensus amino acid sequence of DNA binding proteins, RepB was thought to be the repressor. It was concluded from these data that the inverted repeat is involved in the control of copy number of the plasmid pRBH1. The RepB protein also contains two regions highly homologous with the Rom protein encoded on Escherichia coli plasmid ColE1. The possible mechanism for the copy number control of the plasmid via RepB protein and/or RNAs is discussed.    We cloned the wild-type allele of the spoIID locus of Bacillus subtilis. This DNA region was shown to be transcribed beginning within an hour after the onset of sporulation. The amount of spoIID mRNA present in cells at 1 h after the end of growth was more than 50-fold greater than it was growing cells; the pool of this mRNA decreased steadily after 1.5 h after the end of growth. spoIID mRNA was present in stationary-phase cells of sporulation mutants with lesions in the spo0J and spoIIB genes but was absent in cells carrying spo0B, spo0H, spoIIA, spoIIE, spoIIG, or spoIIIA mutations. In vitro runoff transcription with the E sigma 55, E sigma 37, E sigma 32, and E sigma 29 forms of RNA polymerase indicated that only the E sigma 29 form was able to transcribe the spoIID gene. This result is consistent with results of studies with the Spo- mutants, because only mutants that produced E sigma 29 were able to produce spoIID mRNA in vivo. In the course of this work, two additional transcription units were discovered in the DNA region neighboring the spoIID gene. One of these was expressed during vegetative growth; the other was expressed early during sporulation and corresponded to an in vitro transcript produced by the E sigma 29 forms of RNA polymerase.    The nucleotide sequence (742 bp) of the promoter region of the Bacillus subtilis gluconate (gnt) operon is presented. Nuclease Sl mapping revealed the start point of the transcription and suggested that the expression of this operon is probably regulated at the transcriptional level. The sequences of the -35 and -10 regions suggested that RNA polymerase possessing sigma-43 may recognize this structure. The 223 bp fragment containing 100 bp upstream from the transcription start site actually exhibited a promoter activity when cloned in a promoter probe vector of pPL603B. This promoter activity was highly derepressed and although still under catabolite repression. The fragment on a high copy plasmid could titrate a regulator of the gnt operon so that the expression of the operon on the host chromosome also became derepressed.    Three genes coding for small, acid-soluble spore proteins (SASP) were cloned from Bacillus megaterium, using previously cloned B. megaterium SASP genes (SASP-C and -C-3) as DNA-DNA hybridization probes. One gene (SASP-A) codes for the A protein, a previously identified major SASP. The other two (termed genes for SASP-C-4 and -C-5) are extremely similar in much of their nucleotide sequence to the previously cloned B. megaterium SASP-C-2 gene. The proteins coded for by all these SASP genes had extensive sequence homology with each other and with those coded for by the B. megaterium SASP-C, -C-1, -C-2, and -C-3 genes. Their coding sequences are preceded by strong ribosome-binding sites and are followed by regions of dyad symmetry which presumably are transcription stop sites. The SASP-A, -C-4, and -C-5 genes are expressed in parallel during sporulation, and their transcription start points were localized by the size of the mRNAs produced. The sequences localized 10 and 35 base pairs upstream from the transcription start points show significant homology with the analogous regions of the SASP-C, -C-1, -C-2, and -C-3 genes. The identification of seven closely related SASP genes in B. megaterium indicates that the SASP are the products of a very extensive multigene family.    We have determined the nucleotide sequences of two genes from Klebsiella pneumoniae, nifA, the nif-specific activator of transcription and ntrC, the bifunctional regulatory protein involved in &apos;nitrogen control&apos;. These sequences differ significantly from those previously published. In particular, nifA extends 40 codons beyond the stop codon reported earlier. This extension encodes a putative DNA-binding domain strongly homologous to the Rhizobium meliloti nifA protein and to some extent to the ntrC protein. In all three proteins this domain is linked by a segment of variable length to a strongly conserved central domain of 240 residues. A short segment having the properties of an interdomain linker joins the central region to an N-terminal domain, which is weakly related in the case of the two nifA proteins. This homology is not shared by the N-terminal domain of ntrC, which is clearly but unexpectedly related to the N-terminal domains of a diverse set of procaryotic pleiotropic control proteins, including ompR, dye and nusA from Escherichia coli and spoOA and spoOF from Bacillus subtilis.    The size and location of the 5&apos; end of celA mRNA encoding endoglucanase A of Clostridium thermocellum were investigated in C. thermocellum and in an Escherichia coli clone that carries and expresses the celA gene. In E. coli, the 5&apos; end of celA mRNA was located 134 bp upstream from the initiation codon and 10 bp downstream from a sequence homologous to the consensus sequence of E. coli sigma 70 and Bacillus subtilis sigma 43 (formerly sigma 55) vegetative promoters. In C. thermocellum, a minor transcript appeared to start from the same site, but a major species started 57 bp upstream from the coding sequence. The 5&apos; end of this mRNA was preceded by a sequence reminiscent of B. subtilis sigma 28 vegetative promoters. In both organisms, the size of the transcript suggested that celA belongs to a monocistronic unit of transcription.    The nucleotide sequences of spo0F mutant genes which block the early sporulation process of Bacillus subtilis were determined. The mutation sites together with the results of complementation tests suggested that an open reading frame for a polypeptide of Mr = 14,229 is the spo0F gene. The deduced amino acid sequence shows striking homology with that of the spo0A gene. In addition, the upstream region involving the rib some binding site of the spo0F coding region is also similar to those of spo0A and spo0B. These homologies suggest that all three genes have a similar function in regulating the initiation of sporulation, and that their expression is controlled by a common mechanism. Clear homology is also seen between the spo0 gene products and the transcriptional control proteins, OmpR and Dye, of Escherichia coli suggesting that the spo0 gene products also are involved in the control of transcription.    The 12,177-bp nucleotide (nt) sequence of the late region of Bacillus phage luminal diameter 29 genome was determined. This sequence completes the entire 19,285-bp sequence of phage luminal diameter 29 DNA. Eleven open reading frames were found in this region, and these were assigned to eleven late genes. Ribosome-binding sites and a potential transcriptional promoter and terminator are considered. The nt sequence was compared to the homologous region of the closely related phage PZA and tolerated variations at the nt and amino acid (aa) level were evaluated. The most frequent changes are silent nt substitutions in the third position of codons, but aa substitutions are also found.    The phenotypical and physical characterization of point mutations and deletions affecting sacR were analysed. The 2 X 28-bp palindromic region present within sacR was responsible for sacB inducibility by sucrose. The sacR mutations also affected sacB expression in Escherichia coli, suggesting that the palindromic region is a transcriptional terminator. It is difficult to apply classical bacterial models of negative or positive regulation to sacR function in B. subtilis. We propose that sacR works as a transcriptional attenuator. Our hypothesis is similar to that proposed for the regulation of the tryptophan operon in B. subtilis: the attenuation of sacB transcription could be modulated by a diffusible regulator whose activity is controlled by the inducer, sucrose. Furthermore, we have observed very strong sequence homologies between sacR and the region located upstream from the gene of another secreted enzyme from B. subtilis, beta-glucanase. We propose a preliminary discussion of this observation.    A DNA fragment from the Bacillus subtilis phage phi 29, containing the main early and late viral promoters, has been inserted upstream of the aminoglycoside phosphotransferase gene (neo) derived from the transposon Tn5 and present in a Streptomyces lividans promoter-probe plasmid. The phi 29 promoters are specifically recognized by the S. lividans RNA polymerase which initiates transcription in vivo at the same sites utilized in B. subtilis. Moreover, the viral promoters efficiently direct the synthesis of high levels of the APHII enzyme in S. lividans.    The nucleotide sequence of a 1583-bp DNA fragment containing gene bg1A for endo-beta-1,3-1,4-glucanase (EC 3.2.1.73) of Bacillus amyloliquefaciens strain BE20/78, a high producer of secreted enzymes, has been determined. The gene bg1A comprises an open reading frame (ORF) of 717 bp (= 239 codons) starting with ATG at 469 up to the translation stop codon TAA at 1188. Upstream from the translation initiation codon ATG, the ribosome-binding sequence 5&apos;-AAAAAAGGGGG-3&apos; and two putative bglA promoters have been identified. A box of eleven AT out of twelve base pairs (bp) precedes the -35 region of promoter P1. Beyond the translation stop codon UAA, a sequence of 69 bp can be folded into a hook-like stem-loop structure which probably functions as a transcriptional terminator. The ORF region of the gene bglA reveals about 90% homology with another beta-glucanase gene, bglS of Bacillus subtilis C120 sequenced by Murphy et al. (1984). Three regions of frequent amino acid (aa) changes are indicated. However, the major difference between these is a set of deletions within the non-coding region separating the bglA gene from an unknown preceding ORF and by one deletion shortening the proposed signal peptide by three aa (Pro-Tyr-Leu-). The putative transcription terminator of gene bglA completely lacks homology with a B. subtilis bglS gene. The signification of deletions erasing the &apos;sacR-homology region&apos; in B. amyloliquefaciens, which have been detected in proximity of the beta-glucanase gene of B. subtilis by Steinmetz and Aymerich (1986), is discussed.    A previously characterised promoter region upstream from the Bacillus subtilis argC gene was sequenced. The in vivo position of transcription start point (+1), was determined by mung-bean-nuclease mapping. The nucleotide (nt) sequences in the &apos;-10&apos; (TATAAT) and &apos;-35&apos; (TTGAAT) regions closely resemble consensus promoter sequences recognised by B. subtilis sigma 43 and Escherichia coli sigma 70 RNA polymerases. Between +9 and -64 are three imperfect inverted repeats with high homology to the E. coli arginine biosynthetic gene putative operator sequences (ARG boxes) [Cunin et al., Nucl. Acids Res. II (1985) 5007-5019] and which contain variable intra-repeat distances. Upstream from the &apos;-35&apos; region, extending as far as -71, is a 97% AT-rich sequence. The argC mRNA has a short leader region containing a B. subtilis ribosome-binding site 8 nt upstream from a TTG start codon for an open reading frame (ORF). The deduced amino acid sequence for this ORF contains regions of homology to that for the E. coli argC N-terminal region.    The nucleotide sequence of approximately 3 kb of Bacillus subtilis DNA distal to the trp operon was determined. Three open reading frames were found and these were shown to encode the hisH, tyrA and aroE genes. Integrative plasmids were constructed to interrupt transcription through this region. These data suggest that these three genes can be transcribed from both the trp promoter preceding the trp operon and from a promoter within the trpA structural gene.    Gene expression during endospore formation by Bacillus subtilis is controlled in part by a sporulation-induced form of RNA polymerase, E sigma 29. The determination of the nucleotide sequences that govern utilization of promoters by E sigma 29 has been limited by the small number of available promoters that are recognized by E sigma 29. In the present report we describe a promoter that is adjacent to the rrnB region of the B. subtilis chromosome and is utilized in vitro and in vivo by E sigma 29. S1 nuclease mapping and dinucleotide priming experiments have been used to determine the start point of transcription. The nucleotide sequences near the -10 and -35 region of this promoter, bvx, are conserved, and resemble sequences at these regions for other promoters that are utilized by E sigma 29.    The promoter-proximal region of the Escherichia coli histidine (his) operon, including the promoter, the attenuator and the hisG gene, as well as the first of the nine structural genes of the his operon, have been cloned in Bacillus subtilis. In this host, the hisG gene could not be expressed because its transcription appeared to be irreversibly terminated at the attenuator (Ferretti et al., 1984). When the attenuator plus various lengths of the two bordering regions were removed, one of the attenuatorless sequences cloned in B. subtilis allowed the progression of transcription and complementation of the corresponding hisA mutation in this Gram-positive host. The deletion removed a 349-bp segment which contained the his attenuator and promoter. In B. subtilis, the productive transcription of the hisG gene started at a site in pAT153 and terminated in pC194. Sequence analysis of the deletion indicates that the E. coli ribosome-binding site of the his operon was used for the translation of the E. coli hisG gene mRNA in B. subtilis cells, which can thus grow in the absence of histidine.    The sacR regulatory region which controls inducible expression of sacB, the gene for extracellular levansucrase, was isolated on a 500-bp fragment of Bacillus subtilis chromosomal DNA. The region was separated into two components: a 325-bp fragment which carries a constitutive promoter and a 175-bp fragment which carries a stem-loop structure presumably involved in the induction process. The constitutive sacR promoter was used to drive expression of the plasmid-borne xylE gene, coding for intracellular catechol 2,3-dioxygenase (C23O), with its Pseudomonas ribosome-binding site, in otherwise isogenic sacU-, sacU+ and sacUh mutant strains of B. subtilis. Mutations at the sacU locus have been previously shown to affect multiple cell functions, particularly production of extracellular enzymes. The presence of the sacUh mutation allowed for hyperproduction of C23O to levels exceeding 25% of total cellular protein. This represents a 50- to 100-fold enhancement over levels observed in sacU- and sacU+ host cells. A 5- to 10-fold improvement of C23O production in sacUh cells was observed when the subtilisin (aprA) promoter was used in place of sacR. In contrast, a bacteriophage T5 synthetic promoter was found to be independent of host strain for high-level synthesis of C23O. Hyperproduction of an intracellular protein in sacUh cells suggests that enhancement of exoenzyme production, previously observed in these mutants, occurs prior to the secretion event. Therefore, hyperproduction is most likely due to elevated transcription or translation of specific nucleotide sequences.    The 12,200-bp sequence of the late region of bacteriophage PZA was determined. Open reading frames (ORFs) and potential ribosome-binding sites were found in this region and the ORFs were assigned to eleven late genes. A potential bidirectional transcriptional terminator was found and its possible function is discussed.    We constructed promoter-probe plasmids for Bacillus subtilis based on the promoterless gene for penicillinase (penP) of Bacillus licheniformis. A Bacillus stearothermophilus DNA fragment, which contained translational stop codons for all three reading frames and transcription terminators of the alpha-amylase gene, was inserted upstream from the Shine-Dalgarno sequence for the penP gene. A low-copy-number plasmid (about 10 copies per chromosome), pPF101, carried tetracycline-resistance gene, whereas another high-copy-number plasmid (about 55 copies per chromosome), pPF201, conferred resistance to kanamycin. The intermediate-copy-number plasmids (about 20 copies per chromosome), pPF001, pPF002, pPF011 and pPF012, conferred chloramphenicol resistance to both B. subtilis and Escherichia coli. Vector plasmids, pPF011 and pPF012, were provided with single cloning sites for BamHI, SacI, SmaI and XbaI upstream from the protein coding region of penP, whereas other plasmids contained only unique BamHI cloning sites. The applicability of these plasmids was demonstrated by cloning a promoter for the alpha-amylase gene.    The previously cloned and sequenced streptokinase gene (skc) from Streptococcus equisimilis H46A was inserted into plasmid vectors capable of replication in Bacillus subtilis. The skc gene was expressed by use of its own transcription and translation signals which appeared to meet the stringent requirements of B. subtilis for efficient foreign gene expression. The secreted streptokinase activity began to decline toward the end of the exponential growth phase suggesting that B. subtilis exoproteases hydrolyzed and inactivated the foreign protein.    The recA gene of Proteus mirabilis (recApm) has been cloned into the PstI site of the Bacillus promoter-probe plasmid pPL603. When present on this plasmid, the recApm1) gene is expressed in B. subtilis under the control of its own transcriptional and translational signals. It is concluded that the high AT-content of the DNA sequence upstream of the -35 region is of decisive importance for the usage of the recApm promoter by the B. subtilis RNA polymerase. The results are discussed in relation to the expression barriers found to exist for genes from gram-negative bacteria in the gram-positive B. subtilis.    The structural gene for L-lactate dehydrogenase (LDH; EC 1.1.1.27) from Bacillus stearothermophilus NCA 1503 has been cloned in Escherichia coli and its complete nucleotide sequence determined. The predicted amino acid (aa) sequence of the LDH enzyme agrees with the previously determined aa sequence except to three positions: aa 125 and 126, Ser-Glu, are inverted whilst His at position 130 has been replaced by Ser in our sequence. The lct gene consists of an open reading frame (ORF) commencing from the ATG start codon of 951 bp followed by a TGA stop codon. Upstream from the start codon is a strong (delta G = -14.4 kcal) Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequence, a feature typical of Gram-positive ribosome binding sites. Putative RNA polymerase recognition signals (-35 and -10 regions) have been identified upstream from the lct structural gene but there are no structures resembling Rho-independent transcription termination signals downstream from the TGA stop codon. Two further ORFs, preceded by SD sequences, are present downstream from the lct gene. Thus the lct gene may constitute the first gene of an operon. Subclones of the lct gene have been constructed in the expression plasmid pKK223-3 and the LDH enzyme produced in soluble form at levels of up to 36% of the E. coli soluble cell protein.    The Bacillus stearothermophilus NCA 1503 tryptophanyl tRNA synthetase (WTS; EC 6.1.1.2) gene has been cloned in Escherichia coli and the amino acid (aa) sequence of the enzyme deduced unequivocally from the DNA sequence of the cloned gene. The predicted aa sequence of the WTS enzyme agrees with the previously determined aa sequence except that the DNA sequence indicates a third Arg residue at the C terminus of the enzyme over the two Arg residues indicated by sequencing the protein itself. The trpS gene consists of a 984-bp open reading frame commencing with an ATG start codon and ending with a TAA stop codon. Putative transcriptional promoters, a Shine-Dalgarno sequence and a transcription terminator have been identified. Thus the trpS gene probably constitutes a single transcriptional unit.    A procedure was developed for cloning and characterizing genes that encode proteins with nuclease activity in the Streptococcus pneumoniae [pLS1] host/vector system. Clones are screened for nuclease activity by a DNase colony assay and the nucleases that they produce are characterized by detection of enzyme activity after sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The method was used to clone the gene encoding a DNA polymerase (Pol)-exonuclease of S. pneumoniae. The activity of this enzyme, the predominant DNA Pol of S. pneumoniae, is tenfold greater in cells carrying the multicopy recombinant plasmid than in cells without the plasmid. The enzyme corresponds to a 100-kDa polypeptide, and its properties are similar to PolI of Escherichia coli. A restriction map of the pSM22 plasmid containing the pneumococcal polA gene was obtained. The gene was transferred into Bacillus subtilis and E. coli, and it was expressed in both species. Its direction of transcription was determined by placement of the gene in both orientations in an E. coli hyperexpression plasmid. In one of the orientations the pneumococcal PolI enzyme was produced at a level 50-fold greater than normally found in S. pneumoniae, and it comprised 5% of the total protein.    We have cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli the lethal factor (LF) gene of Bacillus anthracis. At least two of the six LF recombinant plasmids produce full-length LF protein. Transcription of the LF gene in E. coli appears to be under the control of its own B. anthracis promoter. Recombinant LF protein produced in E. coli remains intracellular and is not secreted. However, this LF protein is biochemically active and displays the same lethal effects as LF secreted by B. anthracis in the mouse macrophage assay. The LF gene, like that of the protective antigen gene, is present on the large B. anthracis toxin plasmid pXO1.    The nucleotide sequence of Bacillus phage Nf gene F has been determined. The deduced amino acid sequence of gpF is very similar to that of gp4, the transcriptional activator of phage phi 29. Both proteins contain the consensus structure that is conserved for the DNA-protein interacting domain of DNA-binding proteins such as the repressor, Cro and CII proteins of phage lambda.    The DNA methyltransferase (Mtase) genes of the temperate Bacillus subtilis phages SPR (wild type and various mutants), phi 3T, rho 11 and SP beta have been cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli and B. subtilis host-plasmid vector systems. Mtase activity has been quantitated in these clones by performing in vitro methylation assays of cell-free extracts. The four-phage Mtase genes differ in the amount of Mtase synthesized when transcribed from their genuine promoters. In B. subtilis as well as in E. coli the SPR Mtase is always produced in smaller amounts than the other phage Mtases. Expression levels of the SPR Mtase are dependent on the strength of the upstream vector promoter sequences. Overproduction of the SPR wild-type and mutant enzymes was achieved in E. coli (inducible expression) by fusions to the lambda pL or the tac promoter and in B. subtilis (constitutive expression) by means of the phage SP02 promoter.    The amino-acid sequence deduced from the nucleotide sequence of the spoIIAC gene of Bacillus subtilis has been shown to be homologous to that of the sigma subunit of the Escherichia coli RNA polymerase (Errington et al. 1985). I now describe results that indicate that this gene can be cloned in E. coli only under conditions in which it is not expressed.    A derivative of Tn917 was constructed, referred to as Tn917-lac, which is capable of generating fusions that connect the transcripts of Bacillus subtilis chromosomal genes to the coding sequence of the lacZ gene of Escherichia coli. Two independent insertions of Tn917-lac into the gltA gene and one insertion into the trpE gene (in the trpEDCFBA operon) of B. subtilis were studied in detail, and the results confirmed that Tn917-lac-mediated transcriptional fusions produce levels of beta-galactosidase that reflect accurately the regulated expression of interrupted genes. To facilitate these studies, a procedure was developed that permits the analysis of Tn917-lac-mediated fusions in partial diploids where insertional mutations are complemented by an intact copy of the interrupted genes. Tn917 is known to function efficiently in bacteria representing three quite different Gram-positive genera (Streptococcus, Bacillus, and Staphylococcus) and is known to display a relatively high degree of randomness in its insertions into bacterial genomes, making it likely that Tn917-lac will be useful for the identification and study of many kinds of regulated genes in a wide range of Gram-positive species.    The endo-beta-1,3-1,4-glucanase gene from B. subtilis was placed under yeast promoter control in a number of different yeast expression vectors. The hybrid plasmids were transformed into S. cerevisiae where they directed the synthesis of varying amounts of active enzyme. The presence of B. subtilis DNA sequences 5&apos; to the initiation codon for the B. subtilis beta-glucanase gene reduced expression of the gene in yeast. A 1,000-fold increase in the yield of beta-glucanase was obtained using the ADH1 promoter compared with the CYC1 promoter.    Transcription was found to proceed stepwise during germination of Bacillus subtilis spores. Three distinct phases were evident with respect to pulse-labelled RNA synthesis and the RNA species synthesized. At the early stage of germination (Gm 1:0-15 min), RNA synthesis started in about 5 min and increased linearly when 1 min pulse-labelling with 3H-uridine was used. RNA molecules of relatively low molecular weight (LMW) 4S, 4.5S, 5S, LMW I, II, III, VII RNAs and so on were mainly synthesized during this stage. The relative synthesis of 16S and 23S rRNA was suppressed considerably at Gm 1. This suppression was eliminated by the mid stage of germination (Gm 2:15 to 40 min). Pulse-labelled RNA synthesis took on a constant level for about 20 min (Gm 2). The relative amounts of LMW I, II, III and VI RNAs in an aliquot (10,000 cpm) decreased at Gm 2. Gm 2 was followed by a tremendous increase in the pulse-labelled RNA synthesis (Gm 3 and outgrowth). The transition from Gm 1 to Gm 2 was inhibited by chloramphenicol. LMW I, III, and VI RNAs were densely banded at Gm 2 on administration of chloramphenicol. These results strongly suggested that transcription may be positively regulated at an early stage of germination. Possible positive factor(s) involved in this regulation are discussed.    Bacterial DNA is organized as a compact nucleoid whose structure is maintained by membrane--DNA, protein--DNA and RNA--DNA interactions. We investigated the effect of the transcription inhibitor rifamycin on the structure of the nucleoid in B. subtilis. Decrease of nucleoid compactness and loss of DNA superhelicity were correlated with DNA transcription arrest, both in the wild-type and in a rifamycin-resistant strain. Moreover, the phospholipid content of the nucleoid does not change upon rifamycin treatment.    The gene encoding subtilisin Carlsberg from Bacillus licheniformis has been isolated by molecular cloning using a mixture of synthetic oligonucleotides. The entire nucleotide sequence of the coding sequence as well as 5&apos; and 3&apos; flanking sequences have been determined. The deduced amino acid sequence reveals an N-terminal signal peptide consisting of 29 residues, a pro-peptide of 76 residues followed by the mature protein comprising 274 residues. The ATG initiator codon is preceded by two putative overlapping ribosomal binding sequences. A palindromic sequence typical for transcription termination is found downstream from the TAA stop codon. Structural comparisons between different known subtilisin genes reveal extensive homology, particularly in the parts coding for the pro-region and the mature protein. Expression studies in Bacillus subtilis show that the cloned fragment produces a functional enzyme when inserted after a B. subtilis promoter.    A 1427-bp DNA fragment containing the kanamycin resistance gene, aphA-3, of plasmid pIP1433 from Campylobacter coli was inserted into a shuttle vector. Full expression of aphA-3 was obtained in Bacillus subtilis and in Escherichia coli. This DNA fragment was sequenced in its entirety and the starting point for aphA-3 transcription in B. subtilis, C. coli and E. coli was determined by S1 nuclease mapping. The sequence of the promoter consists of the hexanucleotides TTGACA and TATAAT, with a spacing of 17 bp. The nucleotide sequence of the aphA-3 gene from C. coli and from the streptococcal plasmid pJH1 are identical whereas they differ by two substitutions and deletion of a codon from that cloned from the staphylococcal plasmid pSH2. These results indicate a recent extension of the resistant gene pool of Gram-positive cocci to Gram-negative bacilli. From an analysis of the DNA sequences surrounding the promoter region, we concluded that the DNA fragment containing the aphA-3 gene in plasmid pJH1 has evolved by deletions from a sequence similar to that found in plasmid pIP1433.    Using purified sigma 55 RNA polymerase from Bacillus subtilis in an in vitro transcription system, we have shown that both promoters and terminators of Gram negative origin are recognized by this enzyme. Furthermore, when B. subtilis is transformed with a shuttle vector containing certain of these promoters, synthesis of the Staphylococcus aureus CAT protein is achieved, and levels up to 25% of the total cellular protein can be obtained. These findings indicate a closer evolutionary relationship of the expression machinery of these two bacterial species than has been assumed so far. On the basis of these results, the construction of new expression vectors for B. subtilis is likely to be facilitated, since a variety of well-characterized signal elements from Escherichia coli are available.    The catabolite-resistant sporulation (crsA) mutation is able to overcome the repressive effect of glucose on sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. Three chromosomal crsA mutations, crsA1, crsA4, and crsA47, were transferred by the &quot;gene conversion&quot; process to B. subtilis plasmid pRPD11, which consists of the entire wild-type rpoD coding sequence, encoding the major sigma 43 factor of B. subtilis RNA polymerase, and pUB110. By DNA sequence analysis we showed that all three crsA mutations were identical two-base changes, CCT (proline) to TTT (phenylalanine), within the rpoD coding sequence. Furthermore, the crsA47 mutation restored spo0J and spo0K sporulation to wild-type levels and partially improved the sporulation efficiencies of spo0B, spo0D, and spo0F. Extragenic suppressors (scr) of crsA47 included mutations in spo0A, spo0D, spo0F, and spo0K plus other mutations that have not been specifically identified. Thus sigma 43 appears to be involved in catabolite repression by glucose, to interact either directly or indirectly with spo0 gene products, and to play an important role in the initiation of spore development in B. subtilis.    The organization of six open reading frames which were deduced from the nucleotide sequence of some 10 kb from the replication origin region of Bacillus subtilis resembles the organization of the genes in the rnpA-dnaA-gyrB region of the Escherichia coli chromosome. Based on the detection of homology with the E. coli genes the open reading frames were found to represent the Bacillus &apos;rnpA&apos;, &apos;rpmH&apos;, &apos;dnaA&apos;, &apos;dnaN&apos;, recF and gyrB genes. Only the latter two have also been defined by genetic analysis. Two regulatory regions containing nine and four copies of a repeating sequence, DnaA-box, which is identical with the DnaA protein-binding sequence repeated four times in the E. coli origin of replication, flank the &apos;dnaA&apos; gene of B. subtilis. One or both of them are proposed to function as origins in the initiation of chromosomal replication. Transcription of the &apos;dnaA&apos; gene of Bacillus starts in one of these regions and appears to be coupled to initiation of chromosomal replication. We propose that the conserved gene organization in the &apos;dnaA&apos;-&apos;gyrB&apos; region of B. subtilis is representative of the replication origin region of a primordial replicon. The oriC sequence of E. coli has either been translocated to its present location 44 kb away from the primordial origin or has independently evolved there.    Chemotactic receptors at the bacterial cell surface communicate with flagellar basal structures to elicit appropriate motor behavior in response to extracellular stimuli. Genetic and physiological studies indicate that the product of the cheY gene interacts directly with components of the flagellar motor to control swimming behavior. We have purified and characterized the Salmonella typhimurium CheY protein and have determined the nucleotide sequence of the cheY gene. Amino acid sequence comparisons showed CheY to be homologous over its entire length (129 residues) to the N-terminal regulatory domain of another protein involved in chemotaxis, the CheB methyl esterase. The entire CheY protein and the regulatory domain of CheB also homologous to the N-terminal portions of the Escherichia coli OmpR and Dye proteins and the Bacillus subtilis Spo0A protein. These homologies suggest an evolutionary and functional relationship between the chemotaxis system and systems that are thought to regulate gene expression in response to changing environmental conditions.    A monoclonal antibody specific for an antigenic determinant on the Bacillus subtilis sporulation-induced sigma factor sigma 29 reacted with proteins similar in size to sigma 29 in extracts of sporulating Bacillus licheniformis, Bacillus amyloliquifaciens, Bacillus cereus, Bacillus natto, and Bacillus pumilus but not in extracts prepared from vegetatively growing cultures of these bacteria. These results indicate that RNA polymerase modifications, initially described for B. subtilis, are likely to be common among sporulating Bacillus spp. and that at least some of the specific modifications that are observed in sporulating B. subtilis are conserved among members of this genus.    The Mr 28.000 crystal protein gene of Bacillus thuringiensis subspecies israelensis has been cloned into pBR322 as part of a 9.7 kb HindIII fragment. From hybridization experiments of recombinant p425 DNA with B.t. subspecies israelensis RNA from different stages of growth it was concluded that transcription of the gene is restricted to early sporulation stages. Nucleotide sequence analysis revealed the presence of a large open reading frame with a coding capacity of 249 amino acids (Mr 27.340). Nuclease S1 mapping demonstrated that transcription starts 44 nucleotides upstream of the initiation codon. A Shine-Dalgarno sequence (AAGGAG) was found 10 nucleotides upstream of the translation startpoint. At the 3&apos;-end of the gene a complex secondary structure was found immediately after the stop-codon. Despite the presence of these regulation signals only limited expression in E. coli was detected. This can be explained by assuming that B.t. subsp. israelensis promotor sequences are poorly recognized by E. coli RNA polymerase.    The nucleotide sequence of the Klebsiella pneumoniae ntrA gene has been determined. NtrA encodes a 53,926 Dalton acidic polypeptide; a calculated molecular weight which is significantly lower than that determined by SDS polyacrylamide gel analysis. NtrA is followed by another open-reading frame (orf) of at least 75 amino acids. In the spacer region between ntrA and orf there are no apparent transcription termination or promoter sequences and therefore orf may be co-transcribed with ntrA. Previous authors have proposed that NtrA could act as an RNA polymerase sigma factor but the NtrA amino acid sequence does not show a high level of homology to any known sigma factor. However analysis of sequences of five sigma factors from E. coli and B. subtilis has identified two conserved sequences at the C-terminal end of all these polypeptides. These sequences resemble those found in known site-specific DNA-binding domains and may be involved in recognition of conserved -35 and -10 promoter sequences. A similar pair of sequences is present at the C-terminus of NtrA and could play a role in recognition of ntr-activatable promoters.    The up-to-date state of investigations on cytoplasmic tRNA genes expression and processing of gene products are reviewed. Special emphasize is given to data on RNAase P and splicing.    Sequences essential to the chloramphenicol-inducible expression of cat-86, a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene, reside in a 144-base pair (bp) regulatory region that intervenes between the cat-86 coding sequence and its promoter. A key regulatory element within the 144-bp segment consists of a pair of inverted-repeat sequences that immediately precede the cat-86 coding region and span the ribosome-binding site for the gene. Because of the location of the inverted repeats, cat-86 transcripts are predicted to sequester the ribosome-binding site in a stable RNA stem-loop structure which should block translation of cat-86 mRNA. Chloramphenicol induction of gene expression is believed to result from ribosome-mediated destabilization of the RNA stem-loop structure, which frees the cat-86 ribosome-binding site, thereby allowing translation. In this study we demonstrated that deletion of 85 bp from the 5&apos; end of the 144-bp regulatory region abolishes inducible expression of cat-86, although the gene is transcribed. This deletion leaves intact both the inverted repeats and the cat-86 coding sequence, and the deletion mutation is not complementable. Therefore, inducible regulation of cat-86 requires the inverted repeats plus an upstream, cis-acting regulatory region. The cis-acting region is believed to control translation of cat-86 mRNA by its essential participation in chloramphenicol-induced opening of the RNA stem-loop. cat-86 deleted for the 85-bp regulatory region and therefore virtually unexpressed was used to select for mutations that restore expression to the gene.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    Although most early transcription from SPO1, a lytic DNA bacteriophage of Bacillus subtilis, is specified by the 12.6-kilobase region of the terminal redundancy, early genes from this region have not been identified by standard genetic means. We mapped genes to DNA regions of the SPO1 terminal redundancy by analyzing in vitro protein synthesis from isolated SPO1 restriction fragments in an Escherichia coli-coupled transcription-translation cell-free system. DNA from the terminal redundancy directs the synthesis in vitro of eleven proteins, e3, e4, e6, e7, e9, e12, e15, e16, e18, e20, and e21, which correspond in mobility on sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels with authentic SPO1 early proteins. From their mapped positions on the DNA, genes were positioned downstream from most, but not all, of the twelve early promoter regions identified in vitro in the terminal redundancy. The temporal patterns of early protein synthesis in vivo suggest a differential turning on and off of early promoters in the terminal redundancy. Both in vivo and in vitro evidence suggests the existence of previously unidentified early promoter regions upstream from the genes for e6 and e4 as well as a middle promoter region upstream from the gene for e16.    The activity of aconitase in Bacillus subtilis is greatly reduced in cells cultured in media containing rapidly metabolized carbon sources (e.g., glucose). Thus, expression of this enzyme appears to be subject to a form of catabolite repression. Since the product of the citB gene of B. subtilis is required for aconitase activity, we cloned the wild-type allele of this gene and used this DNA as a probe for transcription of citB in cells grown in various media. The steady-state level of RNA that hybridized to this probe was about 10-fold higher in B. subtilis cells grown in citrate-glutamine medium than in cells grown in glucose-glutamine medium. This result correlates well with the steady-state levels of aconitase activity. Two transcripts were shown to initiate within the cloned DNA; the steady-state level of one of these transcripts varied in the same way as did aconitase activity when cells were grown in media containing different carbon sources. This is the first demonstration of regulation by the carbon source of the level of a vegatative-cell transcript in B. subtilis.    DNA damage-inducible (din) operon fusions were generated in Bacillus subtilis by transpositional mutagenesis. These YB886(din::Tn917-lacZ) fusion isolates produced increased beta-galactosidase when exposed to mitomycin C, UV radiation, or ethyl methanesulfonate, indicating that the lacZ structural gene had inserted into host transcriptional units that are induced by a variety of DNA-damaging agents. One of the fusion strains was DNA-repair deficient and phenotypically resembled a UV-sensitive mutant of B. subtilis. Induction of beta-galactosidase also occurred in the competent subpopulation of each of the din fusion strains, independent of exposure to DNA-damaging agents. Both the DNA-damage-inducible and competence-inducible components of beta-galactosidase expression were abolished by the recE4 mutation, which inhibitS SOS-like (SOB) induction but does not interfere with the development of the competent state. The results indicate that gene expression is stimulated at specific loci within the B. subtilis chromosome both by DNA-damaging agents and by the development of competence and that this response is under the control of the SOB regulatory system. Furthermore, they demonstrate that at the molecular level SOB induction and the development of competence are interrelated cellular events.    The in vitro transcription pattern of Bg/II-digested phi 3T DNA is described. Eight Bg/II fragments that hybridized to in vitro transcription products were unequivocally identified. A further hybridizing region corresponding to a Bg/II triplet was also revealed, giving a total of nine to 11 Bg/II fragments. These represent 47 to 53% of the phi 3T genome. Transcription was shown to initiate within Bg/II fragments B, G, C, H, I, F and J, implying that all of these contain at least one promoter. The relevance of these data to the construction of a cloning vector based on phi 3T is discussed.    The thermostable neutral protease gene nprT of Bacillus stearothermophilus was sequenced. The DNA sequence revealed only one large open reading frame, composed of 1,644 bases and 548 amino acid residues. A Shine-Dalgarno sequence was found 9 bases upstream from the translation start site (ATG), and the deduced amino acid sequence contained a signal sequence in its amino-terminal region. The sequence of the first 14 amino acids of purified extracellular protease completely matched that deduced from the DNA sequence starting at GTC (Val), 687 bases (229 amino acids) downstream from ATG. This suggests that the protease is translated as a longer polypeptide. The amino acid sequence of the extracellular form of this protease (319 amino acids) was highly homologous to that of the thermostable neutral protease from Bacillus thermoproteolyticus but less homologous to the thermolabile neutral protease from Bacillus subtilis. A promoter region determined by S1 nuclease mapping (TTTTCC for the -35 region and TATTTT for the -10 region) was different from the conserved promoter sequences recognized by the known or factors in bacilli. However, it was very homologous to the promoter sequence of the spo0B gene from B. subtilis. The guanine-plus-cytosine content of the coding region of the nprT gene was 58 mol%, while that of the third letter of the codons was much higher (72 mol%).    We describe a thermoinducible-expression system for Bacillus subtilis which utilized an early promoter-operator sequence from temperate phage phi 105 and the thermolabile prophage repressor from the phage variant phi 105 cts23. The system operated at the transcriptional level to control expression in B. subtilis of the cat-86 gene derived from Bacillus pumilis. Details of the strategies used to isolate the early phage promoter are described. This promoter lay in close proximity to the prophage repressor gene on the phi 105 genome. The sequence of the early promoter differed from that of the vegetative B. subtilis consensus promoter by 1 base pair in both the -10 and -35 regions. We also present evidence that our phage-derived expression system could function in Escherichia coli to effect thermoinducible expression of the galK gene.    The wild-type alleles of the gltA292 and gltB1 mutations of Bacillus subtilis have been identified in banks of B. subtilis DNA cloned in phage lambda. These mutations are thought to define the genes for the two subunits of glutamate synthase. Sequences having transforming activity for each allele were subcloned in plasmids and used as hybridization probes for measurements of the rates of synthesis and steady-state levels of glt mRNAs under different growth conditions. For both gltA and gltB, the level of mRNA varied according to the nitrogen source in the growth medium, to an extent sufficient to explain the variation in glutamate synthase activity under the same conditions. Two start points for mRNA synthesis were detected within the cloned DNA, one of which corresponded to the gltA locus. The other start point appears to define a transcription unit, separate from gltA and gltB, within which mutations cause loss of glutamate synthase activity.    We have identified and sequenced a bacteriophage phi 105 gene encoding an immunity repressor, the first to be characterized from a temperate phage infecting a Gram-positive host. Using superinfection immunity as an assay for repressor function, the phi 105 repressor gene was located within a 740-bp PvuII-HindIII subfragment near the left end of the phi 105 EcoRI-F fragment. We show that the repressor is specified by the 5&apos;-proximal coding sequence of a translationally overlapping gene pair, transcribed from right to left on the conventional phi 105 map. Comparison of its amino acid sequence (146 residues) with that of a large number of Gram-negative bacterial and phage repressors revealed a putative DNA-binding region between positions 20 and 39. The coding region is preceded by a strong Shine-Dalgarno sequence 5&apos; AAAGGAG 3&apos;. Deletion analysis of the 5&apos;-flanking DNA allowed to identify transcriptional control elements. Their structure, 5&apos; TTGTAT 3&apos; at -35 and 5&apos; TATAAT 3&apos; at -10, strongly suggests that the phi 105 repressor gene is transcribed by the major vegetative form of B. subtilis RNA polymerase, as would be expected for an early phage gene.    The major acid-soluble spore proteins (ASSPs) isolated from mature spores of Bacillus subtilis are designated alpha, beta, and gamma (about 60, 60, and 100 amino acids in length, respectively). Alpha and beta are very similar, and gamma is very similar to a less predominant ASSP called delta (about 115 amino acids). A minor and very basic ASSP called epsilon is the same size as alpha and beta but is unrelated antigenically. These and several minor ASSPs comprise at least three related families of sporulation-specific gene products. Expression of the alpha and beta genes, detectable as functional mRNA in vitro, coincides with the time of synthesis of all of the major ASSPs in vivo. This apparently coordinate expression is dependent on at least the spo0A, spoIIA, and spoIIIA loci, but not on the spoIVA or spoVA loci, consistent with the late stage of this expression (initiating at 3.5 h after the start of sporulation and peaking at 5 h after start of sporulation). A few minor ASSPs may be asynchronously expressed.    Shuttle vectors have been constructed which are suitable both for the selection of regulatory sequences and for gene cloning in Bacillus subtilis and Streptococcus lactis. The promoter screening vectors contain a promoterless chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene; the insertion of suitable DNA fragments upstream of the gene restored the enzyme activity. With a related set of vectors, transcription termination signals can be selected.    Transcription of the ctc gene in Bacillus subtilis is activated only after exponentially growing cells enter stationary phase. The promoter of the ctc gene is utilized in vitro by two minor forms of RNA polymerase, E sigma 37 and E sigma 32, but not by the most abundant form of RNA polymerase, E sigma 55. We have used the ctc promoter to direct transcription of the xylE gene on plasmid pLC4 and observed that xylE was expressed only in stationary-phase B. subtilis. We also have constructed a series of homologous plasmids that differ only by specific base substitutions in the ctc promoter. We observed that the base substitutions that affected utilization of the ctc promoter in vivo (xylE expression) were the same as those that we had previously shown to affect utilization of the promoter in vitro by E sigma 37 and E sigma 32. We conclude that it is likely that the ctc promoter is utilized in vivo by E sigma 37 or E sigma 32.    Sequences of the sigma factors of Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis were aligned with the sequences of two sigma-like proteins, HtpR, involved in the expression of heat-shock genes in E. coli, and SpoIIG, necessary for endospore formation in B. subtilis. An internal region is highly conserved in the four proteins and is proposed to be involved in binding of sigma factors to core RNA polymerase. The carboxy-terminal part of the four proteins presents the characteristic structure found in several prokaryotic DNA-binding proteins and is proposed to be involved in promoter recognition.    The structural gene (dpnM) for the Dpn II DNA methylase of Streptococcus pneumoniae, which is part of the Dpn II restriction system and methylates adenine in the sequence 5&apos;-G-A-T-C-3&apos;, was identified by subcloning fragments of a chromosomal segment from a Dpn II-producing strain in an S. pneumoniae host/vector cloning system and demonstrating function of the gene also in Bacillus subtilis. Determination of the nucleotide sequence of the gene and adjacent DNA indicates that it encodes a polypeptide of 32,903 daltons. A putative promoter for transcription of the gene lies within a hundred nucleotides of the polypeptide start codon. Comparison of the coding sequence to that of the dam gene of Escherichia coli, which encodes a similar methylase, revealed 30% of the amino acid residues in the two enzymes to be identical. This homology presumably reflects a common origin of the two genes prior to the divergence of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. It is suggested that the restriction function of the gene is primitive, and that the homologous restriction system in E. coli has evolved to play an accessory role in heteroduplex DNA base mismatch repair.    The central portion of the chromosome of temperate Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage SPB was found to contain a region in which large deletions occurred, sometimes at high frequency. Most of the deletions could be placed into one of three groups, del1, del3, and del4, which were missing 11.8, 14.2, and 14 kilobase pairs of DNA, respectively. The chromosomal positions of the three types of deletions overlapped and together defined a continuous region of 27 kilobase pairs surrounding the prophage attachment site attPSPB. The 27-kilobase-pair segment contained no functions required for lytic growth of the phage, but DNA within this region was used as a template for RNA synthesis at several stages in the life cycle of SPB. In addition the transcription of DNA during lytic infection was found to be initiated over a large portion of one-half of the viral chromosome (the arbitrary left half). Subsequently, the synthesis of early RNA was terminated as late transcription continued on the opposite side of the chromosome.    The Bacillus subtilis rpoD gene has been sequenced and the primary structure of its product deduced. The molecular weight calculated for the sigma 43 is 42,828. The DNA and protein sequences of sigma 43 exhibit extensive homology to the Escherichia coli rpoD gene and its sigma 70 product, especially in the C-terminal two-thirds of the sequence. Other proteins exhibiting partial homology with sigma 43 include the E. coli nusA protein, the E. coli htpR (heat-shock regulatory gene) product sigma 32, and specific DNA-binding proteins. No amino acid homology was found between sigma 43 and B. subtilis phage SP01 sigma gp28, phage T7 RNA polymerase, or E. coli DNA primase. The gene exhibits a strong ribosomal binding site and a typical rho-independent transcription terminator sequence. A typical transcription terminator sequence was not observed upstream from the sigma 43 gene. The sigma 43 gene may be part of an operon, resembling the situation found in the E. coli sigma operon.    Bacillus subtilis cytochrome b558 is a transmembrane protein which anchors succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) to the cytoplasmic membrane and is reduced by succinate. The structural gene for this cytochrome was cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli. Random BamHI or BglII fragments of B. subtilis 168 DNA were cloned in the BamHI site of plasmid pHV32. The derived plasmids were used to transform B. subtilis SDH mutants to chloramphenicol resistance by integration of the plasmid via DNA homology. Of some 3,000 transformants tested, 6 were SDH positive and had pHV32 integrated close to the sdh operon. Two plasmids, pKIM2 and pKIM4, with an insert of B. subtilis DNA of 5.7 and 3.4 kilobases, respectively, were generated by transforming E. coli with DNA from the SDH-positive transformants after cleavage with EcoRI or BglII and ligation. In E. coli carrying either of the two plasmids, about 4% of total membrane protein was B. subtilis cytochrome b558. E. coli (pKIM2) also contained antigen which reacted with antibodies specific for the flavoprotein and the iron-sulfur protein subunit of B. subtilis SDH. Enzymatically active, membrane-bound B. subtilis SDH could not be demonstrated in E. coli (pKIM2). The B. subtilis DNA insert in pKIM2 could transform B. subtilis sdhA (cytochrome b558), sdhB (flavoprotein), and sdhC (iron-sulfur protein) mutants to the wild type. The results suggest that pKIM2 carries the whole B. subtilis sdh operon. The data confirm the gene order and the proposed direction of transcription of the B. subtilis sdh operon. Most likely the sdh genes in E. coli(pKIM2) are controlled by their natural promoter.    Evidence is presented that the sporulation-essential locus spoIIG codes for both sigma 29 and a structurally related protein, P31. This demonstrates that at least one specific Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase binding protein provides a critical function in endospore formation. spoIIG-specific RNA is present in B. subtilis cultures that are synthesizing P31 and sigma 29 and is absent in those that are not. A monoclonal antibody specific for an antigenic determinant on P31/sigma 29 detected crossreacting proteins (P25/P21) but not P31 or sigma 29 in a Spo- B. subtilis strain with a mutation at the spoIIG locus (spoIIG41). The appearance of P25 and P21 occurs in this mutant at a time when P31 and sigma 29 would normally appear and suggests that they are homologous proteins. Transformation of the spoIIG41 strain with plasmid DNA carrying the structural gene for spoIIG complements the Spo- phenotype and results in the synthesis of P31, sigma 29, P25, and P21 at the appropriate times during sporulation. In Escherichia coli, the cloned spoIIG sequence encoded a protein that reacted with the anti-P31/sigma 29 monoclonal antibody and had the electrophoretic mobility of authentic P31.    We have studied the in vitro and in vivo transcription of a promoter for Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase on bacteriophage phi 29 DNA. The promoter is identified as an early promoter as it is transcribed in vitro by uninfected B. subtilis sigma 55-containing RNA polymerase; is transcribed in vivo at both 7 min after infection and in the presence of chloramphenicol; and is transcribed right to left on the standard phi 29 map. The nucleotide sequence of the promoter and the initiation site for RNA synthesis are reported. We have also examined the kinetics of RNA synthesis initiation using a single round run-off transcription assay. The overall rate of initiation was found to be 1.6 X 10(6) M-1 s-1 while the rate of conversion of unstable to stable polymerase-promoter complexes was 0.049 s-1. These values are comparable to those for similar promoters for Escherichia coli RNA polymerase.    We have determined the nucleotide sequence of a 4222-base segment of DNA which contains the promoter, the coding region, and the terminator of a crystal protein gene cloned from a Bacillus thuringiensis plasmid. A sequence of 1176 amino acids encoding a Mr 133,500 peptide was deduced from the single open reading frame. This protein-coding region was analyzed for codon usage, predicted hydropathy, and predicted secondary structure. Examination of the base sequence revealed the presence of several inverted and direct repeats located in both the coding and noncoding regions. S1 nuclease mapping was used to locate the transcription termination point at a site following a potentially very stable stem-and-loop structure.    The bacteriophage SP01 genome encodes a virus-specific type II DNA-binding protein, TF1. The bacterial proteins of this ubiquitous and evolutionarily conserved class are thought to bind non-specifically to DNA. In contrast, the experiments described here demonstrate that TF1 binds to specific sites in SP01 DNA. Several of these sites have been characterized by DNase I &apos;footprinting&apos; and four of them have been shown to overlap strong phage promoters for Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase holoenzyme. We speculate on the possible structural basis of site-selective DNA binding by a protein of this class.    We have determined the nucleotide sequence of a 3706 bp stretch of Bacillus subtilis chromosomal DNA that complements all known spoVA mutations. The sequence contains five consecutive large open reading frames capable of encoding proteins of molecular weights ranging from approximately 15000 to 36000. Analysis using integrational plasmids suggests that the region is likely to be transcribed as a single mRNA. A novel form of complementation analysis, based on derivatives of bacteriophage phi 105 carrying the cloned spoVA locus, has been used to define four distinct complementation groups among the eight previously characterized spoVA mutations. The spoVA locus is the largest polycistronic sporulation operon yet characterized.    The staphylococcal nuclease (nuc) gene from Staphylococcus aureus has been cloned and expressed in Bacillus subtilis. The nuclease protein was expressed either from its own promoter and translation start signals, or from a combination of a B. subtilis promoter, ribosome binding site, and a signal peptide sequence. Greater than 80% of the active gene product was secreted into the medium, whereas, when a signal peptide sequence was absent, as little as 4% of the nuclease activity was found in the culture medium. Intracellular (or cell-bound) nuclease, as determined by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and Western blotting, was shown to have the molecular weight of the predicted precursor protein with the signal peptide. Levels of nuclease reached 50 mg per liter in the culture medium, depending on the growth medium and the strain used. These findings indicate the prospective use of nuclease as a model system for studying secretion of heterologous proteins in B. subtilis.    The highly pleiotropic stage 0 sporulation locus of Bacillus subtilis, spo0A, has been cloned in bacteriophage lambda, subcloned in plasmids, and sequenced. The locus was found to code for a protein of 29,691 Da. Analysis of the in vivo transcripts from this region by nuclease S1 protection experiments located the start and stop of transcription of the locus. The transcription start site was preceded by a promoter resembling sigma 37-dependent promoters. Two mutations originally assigned to a second locus, spo0C, in this region because of their weakly pleiotropic phenotypes were cloned and sequenced. The mutations were found to be different missense alterations in the same base of the 10th codon preceding the carboxyl end of the Spo0A protein. These results, along with the finding that mutations in the spo0A gene product [Hoch, J. A., Trach, K., Kawamura, F. &amp; Saito, H. (1985) J. Bacteriol. 161, 552-555] suppress the requirement for spo0B, spo0E, and spo0F gene products in transcription from sigma 28-dependent promoters, suggest that the Spo0A protein interacts directly with the transcription machinery to effect the initiation of sporulation. The deduced amino acid sequence of the Spo0A protein was highly related to that of the OmpR regulatory protein of Escherichia coli.    The gerA locus, mutations in which affect the germination response of spores to L-alanine and related amino acids, is contained within a 6-kilobase region of DNA cloned in phage and plasmid vectors. Fragments from this region, subcloned in the shuttle vector pHV33, were introduced into Bacillus subtilis, and their ability to complement chromosomal gerA mutations in a recE4 background was examined. Although the plasmids were somewhat unstable, it was possible to score complementation within spore-containing colonies on nutrient agar by their ability to reduce 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride in an overlay. These studies have assigned the 10 gerA mutations tested to three complementation groups. An analysis of Tn1000 insertions into the cloned DNA of two relatively stable plasmids that together encompass the entire gerA region has identified more precisely the location and extent of the complementation units; recombination studies and in vitro mutagenesis were used to further delineate the extents of two of the units. The evidence suggests that the three complementation units are adjacent and that they are probably capable of separate transcription.    The complete nucleotide sequence of ermA, the prototype macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin B resistance gene from Staphylococcus aureus, has been determined. The sequence predicts a 243-amino-acid protein that is homologous to those specified by ermC, ermAM, and ermD, resistance determinants from Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus sanguis, and Bacillus licheniformis, respectively. The ermA transcript, identified by Northern analysis and S1 mapping, contains a 5&apos; leader sequence of 211 bases which has the potential to encode two short peptides of 15 and 19 amino acids; the second, longer peptide has 13 amino acids in common with the putative regulatory leader peptide of ermC. The coding sequence for this peptide is deleted in several mutants in which macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin B resistance is constitutively expressed. Potential secondary structures available to the leader sequence of the wild-type (inducible) transcript and to constitutive deletion, insertion, and point mutations provide additional support for the translational attenuation model for induction of macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin B resistance.    Expression of the cloned glnA gene [coding for glutamine synthetase (EC 6.3.1.2)] of Bacillus subtilis was 10-fold higher in an Escherichia coli strain grown under nitrogen-limiting conditions than in the same strain under nitrogen-excess conditions. Mutations in the E. coli glnA, glnB, glnD, glnE, glnF, glnG, and glnL genes had no effect on the observed regulation. To test whether sequences within the B. subtilis DNA (3.2 kilobase pairs) were responsible for the observed regulation, a plasmid carrying a transcriptional fusion of the B. subtilis glnA promoter with E. coli lacZ was constructed. beta-Galactosidase levels coded for by this plasmid were found to be negatively regulated in trans by a plasmid carrying the entire B. subtilis glnA gene. Analysis of various deletion plasmids showed that the 1.4-kilobase-pair region encoding glutamine synthetase was necessary for the observed regulation of beta-galactosidase. Plasmids coding for 67% or more of the glutamine synthetase polypeptide gave at least partial repression, but a plasmid carrying 30% of the structural gene, as well as a plasmid carrying a deletion internal to glnA, gave no repression. DNA downstream from glnA (to within 130 base pairs of the end of the gene) was not required for the observed regulation. These results suggest that the glnA gene of B. subtilis is autoregulated, supporting the model for glnA control proposed by Dean et al. [Dean, D. R., Hoch, J. A. &amp; Aronson, A. I. (1977) J. Bacteriol. 131, 981-987].    Plasmid pBD64, a vector which is useful for cloning in Bacillis subtilis (T. J. Gryczan, A. G. Shivakumar, and D. Dubnau (1980), J. Bacteriol. 141, 246-253), has at least three substantial transcription units. Two of these include the single EcoRI, XbaI, and BamHI sites, while the other includes the single BglII site. Each of these transcripts was synthesized in the counterclockwise direction, relative to the pBD64 restriction map. No transcripts were detected in the opposite direction. Infection by bacteriophage SPO1 caused a substantial decrease in each of these transcripts. No new pBD64 transcripts were detected during SPO1 infection. Various SPO1 genes, cloned at several of these pBD64 sites, were tested for expression by observing their capacity to complement SPO1 mutants. Several middle and late genes were expressed substantially, regardless of the orientation in which the fragments were inserted. Since transcription from the vector could cause expression only in one orientation, this argues that the necessary transcription originated at SPO1 promoters, and, thus, that SPO1 middle and late promoters can be active in thymine-containing DNA.    We have determined nucleotide sequence of some 10,000 base pairs (bp) in the oriC region of the Bacillus subtilis chromosome. Initiation sites of transcription from this region were determined in vivo by the S1-mapping method. Five major initiation sites were found in the leader sequences of five open reading frames (ORF) deduced from the nucleotide sequence. The sixth site is located inside the ORF323(&quot;recF&quot;). Putative promoters were found for each transcript. Function of these promoters was demonstrated in Escherichia coli by the Maxi-cell method using appropriate fragments cloned in pBR vectors. Based on these results, genes in 10,000 bp oriC region are divided into 4 transcriptional units. GyrB composes one unit with two other ORFs, while gyrA constitutes a single unit by itself. The promoters for ORF446(&quot;dnaA&quot;) and ORF378(&quot;dnaN&quot;) are located within the putative signal sequences for oriC. Transcription from these promoters is dependent on a dna-initiation gene, dnaB.    Expression levels of Bacillus amyloliquefaciens alpha-amylase, Escherichia coli TEM-beta-lactamase, and Semliki Forest virus glycoprotein E1 genes were compared in Bacillus subtilis. All three model genes were expressed by using a secretion vector, constructed by joining the B. amyloliquefaciens alpha-amylase promoter and signal sequence with plasmid pUB110 (I. Palva, M. Sarvas, P. Lehtovaara, M. Sibakov, and L.Kaariainen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 79:5582-5586, 1982). When transformed B. subtilis cells were grown to early stationary phase, the amount of beta-lactamase in the culture medium was ca. 10% and that of E1 was ca. 0.01% of the amount of alpha-amylase. The amounts of specific, full-length transcripts of the cloned genes were estimated by Northern blot hybridization to be roughly equal. The half-lives of these transcripts in B. subtilis were also similar. Pulse-chase experiments with [35S]methionine showed that alpha-amylase and beta-lactamase were translated and secreted at comparable rates but that beta-lactamase was degraded during the chase periods. In transformed minicells from B. subtilis, the products of alpha-amylase, beta-lactamase, and E1 genes accumulated at similar rates. We conclude that the expression of the three genes cloned in the secretion vector was similar at the levels of transcription and translation in B. subtilis. In the case of beta-lactamase, the low-yield could be explained by proteolytic degradation of the secreted product by B. subtilis exoproteases, whereas with E1 we could not determine whether the low yield was due to proteolytic degradation, inefficient secretion, or both.    An 8-kilobase fragment already known to contain the gyrA gene of Bacillus subtilis was shown to encode the gyrB gene as well. Plasmids containing this fragment can rescue both B. subtilis gyrA and gyrB mutants and complement Escherichia coli gyrA mutants. Deletion analysis has indicated the gene locations on the cloned fragment. Under low-stringency conditions the cloned E. coli gyrA and gyrB genes each hybridized to the appropriate subfragments, confirming the assignment of the gene locations on the cloned DNA. In E. coli maxicells, proteins of 67,000 (gyrA) and 77,000 (gyrB) Mr were synthesized. Analysis of proteins encoded by various subfragments indicated the direction of transcription. Although the gyrA and gyrB genes are located adjacent to each other on the chromosome, they may be transcribed independently since expression of gyrA protein is not dependent upon the gyrB gene in maxicells.    Bacillus subtilis dnaE encodes a protein essential for DNA replication and is tightly linked to rpoD, the gene for the major sigma factor of RNA polymerase. We have now determined the 1809-base pair sequence of the dnaE coding region, which precedes rpoD and is transcribed in the same counterclockwise direction on the chromosome. From the DNA sequence, we found that the dnaE protein comprised 603 amino acids with a calculated molecular mass of 68,428 daltons. This protein had significant and extensive regions of homology with Escherichia coli DNA primase, the polymerase that synthesizes short RNA primers during discontinuous DNA replication. Features of the coding and flanking regions that may modulate dnaE expression include a relatively weak ribosomal binding site (delta G&apos; = -13.8 kcal), the use of uncommon codons in the reading frame, and no obvious promoter sequence for either dnaE or rpoD. Together, these results suggest that dnaE codes for B. subtilis DNA primase and, in light of the similarities to the organization of the E. coli sigma operon, that expression of dnaE may be coregulated with rpoD in B. subtilis.    Bacillus subtilis possesses several forms of RNA polymerase, each differing in its sigma subunit and its specificity of promoter recognition. The sequential appearance of sigma subunits, which change the promoter recognition specificity of RNA polymerase, may have a key role in controlling the temporal pattern of gene expression required for endospore development in B. subtilis. Several genes that are expressed over relatively long periods of time during the developmental cycle are transcribed by more than one form of RNA polymerase, which initiate transcription from either tandem or overlapping promoter. The promoter region for the ctc gene is interesting because transcription is initiated at or near the same position by both sigma 37 RNA polymerase (E sigma 37), a minor form in growing cells, and sigma 29 RNA polymerase (E sigma 29), a form which appears approximately 2 h after the initiation of sproulation. Here we report that several base substitutions in the ctc promoter differentially affect the utilization of the promoter by E sigma 37 or E sigma 29.    The effect of the peptide antibiotic gramicidin S, produced by Bacillus brevis Nagano, was tested on the transcription system of the producer by using in vivo, semi in vitro and in vitro systems for studies of RNA synthesis. The effects of other peptide antibiotics (linear gramicidin, tyrocidine and tyrothricin) were also tested for comparison. It was found that (a) RNA polymerase isolated from either gramicidin S-producing or non-producing strains had a similar structure and requirements and that (b) the presence of gramicidin S caused a very strong inhibition of the in vitro transcription system. We present evidence that this inhibition is most probably through formation of a complex between the antibiotic and the DNA. In vivo studies indicate that transcription during growth and sporulation is not affected by gramicidin S and the implication is made that gramicidin S inhibits transcription during germination and outgrowth.    Bacillus subtilis sigma 28-specific promoters (P28) are utilized by a minor form of B. subtilis RNA polymerase (sigma 28RNA polymerase) and not by the predominant RNA polymerases of B. subtilis (sigma 43 RNA polymerase) or Escherichia coli (sigma 70 RNA polymerase). However B. subtilis P28 are effective promoters in E. coli. This transcription depends on the E. coli htpR+ gene. Similarly, the E. coli rpoD heat shock promoter which is under control of htpR is used in vitro by B. subtilis sigma 28 RNA polymerase. These observations are explained by the fact that E. coli htpR is a minor sigma factor (sigma 32) which shares an overlapping promoter specificity with B. subtilis sigma 28 RNA polymerase. Hence control of bacterial regulons by minor sigma factors is not restricted to Bacilli, or bacteria that carry out a complex differentiation process, but is probably a general, regulatory mechanism in prokaryotes. Transcription from B. subtilis P28 in E. coli does not depend on a heat shock. This suggests that the sequences that control E. coli sigma 32 action are separate from those that control the heat shock regulon. Hence the action of polymerases controlled by minor sigma factors in both B. subtilis and E. coli appears to be controlled by a separate set of regulatory factors.    A 2.3-kilobase pair EcoRI fragment containing the spo0B locus has been sequenced. The spo0B locus was shown to code for a protein of 22,542 daltons. Promoter distal to the spo0B locus, an open reading frame was uncovered which was preceded by a strong ribosome-binding site. S1 nuclease protection experiments revealed that both the spo0B locus and this open reading frame were part of the same transcript. A portion of the middle of the open reading frame was cloned in the integrative vector pJH101. Transformation of this plasmid into Bacillus subtilis 168 was only rarely successful, and those few colonies that arose consisted of cells that had lost the plasmid. The results suggested that the product of this open reading frame is essential for the growth of the bacterium. The regulation of the spo0B locus was studied by using translational spo0B-lacZ fusions in an integrative vector. These studies revealed that the spo0B locus was maximally expressed during vegetative growth. It was estimated that 50 to 100 copies of the protein are present during this period. Sequence analysis of the region upstream from the spo0B locus revealed another operon that contained a gene coding for a protein homologous to ribosomal protein L27 of Escherichia coli.    To develop a technique for identifying Bacillus subtilis genes whose products affect transcription from promoters recognized by sigma 37-containing RNA polymerase (E-sigma 37), we cloned the promoter region of a gene (ctc) that is actively transcribed in vitro by E-sigma 37 into a plasmid (pPL603B) so that a transcriptional fusion was created between ctc and a plasmid-borne chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) gene. CAT levels in B. subtilis carrying the ctc/CAT fusion plasmid varied in a manner that was consistent with the known pattern of ctc RNA synthesis. Mutagenesis of cells harboring the ctc/CAT plasmid led to the isolation of bacterial clones which displayed altered chloramphenicol resistance. Analysis of the mutants demonstrated that CAT activity was substantially changed in the mutant cells. Several of the B. subtilis mutants, both CAT overproducers and underproducers, also had acquired a sporulation-deficient phenotype. The mutations responsible for altered CAT expression were not carried on the plasmid. Analysis of RNA synthesized by mutant cells indicates that at least a portion of the mutants may be altered in the level of transcription from the ctc promoter and, hence, are likely to define B. subtilis genes which influence this process.    Southern transfer analysis of Bacillus licheniformis MC14 DNA, using as probe a DNA fragment from within the coding region of a previously cloned alkaline phosphatase (APase) gene, revealed a second area of hybridization adjacent to the cloned APase gene. A second APase gene (APase II) was subcloned from the same plasmid clone, pMH8, from which the first APase gene (APase I) had been subcloned. The two genes are arranged in tandem with several hundred base pairs separating them. Immunoblot analysis showed that both code for Mr 60,000 proteins that crossreact with anti-APase. Both proteins enzymatically cleave 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate. In vitro transcription showed that APase I and APase II are transcribed in the same direction but that the two genes require different forms of Bacillus RNA polymerase: sigma 55- and sigma 37-containing RNA polymerase holoenzymes, respectively.    The mutation sof-1 suppresses the sporulation defect of mutations in either the spo0B, spo0E, or spo0F stage 0 sporulation genes. Through the use of integrative plasmids carrying the portion of the chromosome including the spo0A locus and flanking regions, the sof-1 mutation was localized near the spo0A locus. A plasmid carrying a fragment of DNA with sof genetic activity was constructed. Nucleic acid sequence analysis of this fragment revealed a single base change that resulted in a substitution of lysine for asparagine in the 12th codon of the spo0A gene. The results indicate that certain missense mutations in the spo0A gene bypass the necessity for the spo0B, spo0E, and spo0F gene products in sporulation. Several models for the interaction of these gene products may be imagined.    The nucleotide sequence of a 2.14 kb fragment of Bacillus subtilis DNA containing the citG gene encoding fumarase was determined using the dideoxy chain termination method. The citG coding region of 1392 base pairs (464 codons) was identified, and the deduced Mr (50425) is in good agreement with that of the protein identified from expression in Escherichia coli maxicells. There is no sequence homology between the B. subtilis and E. coli fumarases. Overlapping potential promoter sequences have been identified for sigma 28, sigma 37 and sigma 55 RNA polymerase holoenzymes. The DNA fragment also contains the proximal part of the gerA locus, responsible for L-alanine-sensitive spore germination.    The 5200-bp nucleotide sequence of the major early region of bacteriophage PZA has been determined. Open reading frames (ORFs) and potential transcriptional and translational regulatory signals were found in this region. The sequence was compared with the known sequence of the homologous region of the closely related phage phi 29 (Yoshikawa and Ito, 1982). This comparison permitted a more accurate assignment of several ORFs and regulatory signals.    A gene involved in the regulation of lysogeny in the temperate Bacillus subtilis phage phi 105 has been identified and isolated. A plasmid, pDC4, was constructed that contains a 740-bp HindIII-PvuII fragment that is derived from the phi 105 immunity region and is capable of rendering B. subtilis immune to infection by phi 105. Three different hybrid plasmids that contain the 740-bp fragment, pAG101 [Cully and Garro, J. Virol. 34 (1980) 789-791], pDC1 and pDC2, were found to synthesize a common 18-kDal polypeptide in B. subtilis minicells and Escherichia coli maxicells. The nucleotide (nt) sequence of this region revealed three open reading frames (ORFs) that predict proteins with Mrs of 16521, 7332, and 5516. In vivo synthesized phi 105 prophage RNA was mapped by primer extension and shown to be transcribed from the DNA strand coding for the Mr 16521 protein. The 5&apos; end of the phi 105 lysogen RNA was mapped to a region that contains conserved sequences for RNA polymerase recognition.    The program of gene expression that underlies endospore formation by Bacillus subtilis may be controlled in part by a sporulation-induced form of RNA polymerase, E sigma 29. The nucleotide sequences of four promoters, which are known to be recognized by E sigma 29, are highly conserved at two regions, 10 bp and 35 bp upstream from the start point of transcription. We have used oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis to construct several base substitutions in the ctc promoter from B. subtilis to test the role of the highly conserved sequences in utilization of the promoter by E sigma 29. In vitro transcription analysis demonstrated that the conserved nucleotides at positions -15, -14 and -12 affect the utilization of the promoter by E sigma 29. These and previous results support a model in which E sigma 29 recognizes its cognate promoters by interacting with nucleotides near the -10 and -35 regions. We also examined the effects of these base substitutions on utilization of the promoter by two other forms of RNA polymerase from B. subtilis, E sigma 37 and E sigma 32.    Mutations (crsA47 and crsA4) in the major sigma factor gene (rpoD) of Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase have been found to be powerful intergenic suppressors of spoOB, spoOE, spoOF, spoOK and spoIIG mutations. The crsA47 suppressor restores sporulation of spoOE, spoOF, spoOK and spoIIG mutants to levels near those of wild type bacteria and substantially improves the sporulation of a spoOB strain. The crsA mutations are shown to prevent the induction by aliphatic alcohols of SpoO phenocopies in wild type B. subtilis cells.    Plasmid pPL703 is a promoter-cloning plasmid for Bacillus subtilis consisting of the promoter-less cat-86 gene inserted between the EcoRI and BamHI sites of pUB110. The orientation of cat-86 in pPL703 is opposite to that of two major transcript species that occur within the pUB110 vector portion of pPL703. Therefore, transcripts initiated in cloned promoters which activate cat-86 expression presumably must terminate prior to entering the vector portion of pPL703 to permit stable maintenance of promoter-containing derivatives in host cells. We have identified an apparent Rho-independent transcription terminator 35 bp 3&apos; to the cat-86 coding sequence. A restriction fragment spanning the terminator is 90% efficient in terminating transcription in both B. subtilis and Escherichia coli. The structure of the cat-86 transcription termination site is similar to Rho-independent termination sites identified in E. coli.    The complete nucleotide (nt) sequence of two Bacillus megaterium genes coding for small, acid-soluble spore proteins (SASP), termed C-1 and C-2, has been determined. The nt sequences of the genes are greater than 98% identical in the coding regions, greater than 90% identical in approx. 180 bp and approx. 50 bp of upstream and downstream flanking sequences, respectively, and exhibit features conserved in related B. megaterium SASP genes. Northern blot analyses showed that the SASP-C-1 and/or C-2 genes are transcribed during sporulation in parallel with the related SASP-C and C-3 genes. The promoter regions of the SASP-C-1 and C-2 genes were localized, based on the sizes of their mRNAs and the positions of transcription termination sequences. The SASP-C-1 and C-2 genes&apos; promoter regions exhibit significant homology with those for the SASP-C and C-3 genes.    The DNA methyltransferase (Mtase) genes of temperate Bacillus subtilis phages phi 3T, rho 11 and SP beta were cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli. Each gene specifies a 47-kDa1 protein, which modifies BsuR (GGCC) and Fnu4HI (GCNGC) target sequences. Transcription is controlled by phage promoters located on the cloned fragments. The direction of transcription and the approximate position of the Mtase genes were determined. DNA/DNA hybridization experiments revealed close structural relatedness of the phi 3T, rho 11 and SP beta genes. A significant degree of homology was also found among these genes and the Mtase gene of related phage SPR, which codes for an enzyme with different modification specificity. These results suggest a common ancestor of the different phage Mtase genes. Phage Z, the only BsuR-sensitive member of this phage group, lacks a modification gene, but contains regions homologous to sequences flanking the SPR, phi 3T, rho 11 and SP beta Mtase genes.    The plasmid gene cat-86 specifies chloramphenicol-inducible, chloramphenicol acetyltransferase in Bacillus subtilis. The inducible regulation is independent of the promoter that is used to activate cat-86 and is independent of the cat-86 coding sequence. We have proposed that the regulation of cat-86 results from the transcription of a pair of inverted-repeat sequences that immediately precede the coding sequence. These transcripts are predicted to sequester the cat-86 ribosome binding site in a stable RNA stem-loop which, in theory, should block the ribosome binding site from pairing with 16S rRNA. Inducible expression of cat-86 may therefore result in part from regulation of the translation of cat-86 mRNA. However, chloramphenicol-induction correlates with increased levels of cat-86 mRNA and the RNA stem-loop preceding the cat-86 coding sequence structurally resembles a rho-independent transcription terminator. We have therefore tested the inverted-repeats as a potential site of transcription termination. Transcription studies performed in vitro using SP6 RNA polymerase and in vivo by S1 mapping demonstrate that a substantial fraction of the potential cat-86 transcripts terminate at a site immediately 3&apos; to the inverted-repeats. The results of the in vivo experiments suggest that the termination signal may be partially relieved by growth of cells in chloramphenicol.    The gene conferring resistance to kanamycin, aphA, and originating from the streptococcal plasmid pJH1 was inserted into a shuttle vector. Full expression of aphA was obtained in Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis. The starting point for aphA transcription, determined by S1 nuclease mapping, was located 340 base pairs upstream from the ATG translational initiator codon. The sequence of the promoter consists of the hexanucleotides TTGACA and TATCTT, with a spacing of 17 base pairs. The stability profile of a 600 base-pair-long DNA fragment containing the aphA promoter and the translational initiation site indicated that, as already reported for Escherichia coli, both structures are located in domains of weak stability.    Using an immunological probe, we have determined that the synthesis of the Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase promoter specificity determinant sigma 29 is a developmentally regulated event. sigma 29 is absent from vegetatively growing cells but is abundant in sporulating cells for a restricted (2-h) period during differentiation (hour 2 to hour 4 into the sporeforming process). The narrowness of this period suggests that sigma 29 is a regulatory factor that directs the transcription of a subpopulation of genes at a precise, intermediate stage of spore formation. This view predicts that sigma 29 should be dispensable for early sporulation events. We verified this prediction by an analysis of sigma 29 accumulation in mutants that are blocked at different stages of sporulation in which we show that cells can advance to at least an intermediate point in development (stage III) in the absence of detectable sigma 29. Lastly, our anti-sigma 29 antibody probe detected a second, previously unrecognized protein in Bacillus cell extracts that may be a precursor to sigma 29. This protein, P31 (molecular weight, 31,000) is synthesized earlier in sporulation than is sigma 29. It has a peptide profile that is similar to sigma 29 and is present in all Bacillus subtilis Spo- mutants that were tested and found to still be able to accumulate sigma 29.    We have sequenced the region of the Bacillus phage phi 29 genome that encodes gene 16, the gene product of which catalyzes the in vivo and in vitro genome-encapsidation reaction. The identity of the coding frame was confirmed by sequencing a sus mutant, sus16(300). It is concluded that gene 16 encodes a 39-kDal protein and is comprised of 331 amino acids. Only 30 bp separates gene 16 from the last open reading frame of the right early region. Analysis of potential secondary structures in this region suggests that the same sequences may be involved in the termination of both the late and early transcripts.    We have sequenced the rightmost 2216 bp of the Bacillus phage phi 29 genome. This region encompasses the right early region and completes the sequence of the phi 29 early functions. The sequence of gene 17, an early gene implicated in the replication process, is presented. From these results we predict that gene 17 encodes a 19.1-kDal protein. Further analysis of the sequence revealed five previously undetected potential genes, encoding 12.6-, 12.4-, 15.2-, 6.2- and 4.6-kDal proteins. The biological efficacies of some of these putative genes were demonstrated using an Escherichia coli in vitro transcription-translation system. We also examined the transcriptional and translational signals present on this region of the genome.    The gene for Bacillus amyloliquefaciens extracellular RNase (barnase) has been cloned in an inactive form in Escherichia coli following insertional mutagenesis by transposon Tn917. The nucleotide (nt) sequence of the gene was determined and the deduced amino acid (aa) sequence found to correspond almost precisely to the previously determined sequence. An open reading frame (ORF) of 72 codons precedes the mature sequence. The probable translation start site is 46 or 47 codons before the N-terminal alanine of the mature protein, 11 (or 14) bp from a putative ribosome-binding site (RBS). Within this leader sequence is a hydrophobic 15 aa core preceded by three basic residues which is characteristic of a secretory signal sequence. A pro-barnase protein with four extra aa at the N-terminus has been detected extracellularly indicating that the signal peptidase-cutting site lies before the mature protein. An inverted repeat that may act as a transcription terminator was found at the 3&apos; end of the gene. The gene is maintained in E. coli with a short inverted repeat from the termini of Tn917 inserted into the coding sequence. Northern blot analysis of RNA from B. amyloliquefaciens shows an approx. 780-nt transcript produced during exponential and stationary growth phases. The inactive cloned gene produces an approx. 480-nt transcript in E. coli and two transcripts of approx. 480 and 780 nt in Bacillus subtilis.    The nucleotide sequence of a 2.1-kb fragment of Bacillus subtilis DNA that contains part of the spore germination locus, gerA, has been determined. An open reading frame (ORF) of 1440 bp (480 codons) has been identified which corresponds to the previously located complementation unit I of the gerA locus. The orientations of transcription of the gerA and of the adjacent fumarase (citG) gene are divergent. The deduced polypeptide product of the gerA gene, of Mr 53 506, contains both hydrophobic and hydrophilic domains and is likely to be membrane-associated.    We have mapped the chromosomal locus of rpoD, which encodes the major sigma factor of Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase. The rpoD locus lay between aroD and lys, tightly linked to dnaE and inseparable from crsA. Marker order in this region was acf-aroD-dnaE-rpoD(crsA)-spoOG-lys. By transformation using cloned donor DNA from the rpoD region, we identified the gene immediately upstream of rpoD as dnaE, which coded for a 62,000 dalton protein essential for DNA replication. Both dnaE and rpoD were transcribed in the same direction, counterclockwise on the chromosome. The gene functions and organization in the rpoD region are thus similar to those of the E. coli sigma operon. We also used transformation to identify crsA47 as a mutation within the sigma coding region itself. The crsA alteration of sigma renders the sporulation process insensitive to glucose catabolite repression, and also restores sporulation ability to strains carrying early-blocked spoOE, spoOF, and spoOK mutations. Thus the major sigma factor and these spoO gene products directly or indirectly affect the same cellular function.    The nucleotide (nt) sequence of the tetracycline resistance (TcR) region (1628 bp) of the Bacillus plasmid pTHT15 was determined. A single open reading frame (ORF), encoding a 458 amino acid (aa) 50-kDal protein (TET), is present after a GTG initiation codon preceded by a ribosome-binding site (RBS-2). The transcriptional start point, at a position 120 nt upstream from the GTG codon was determined by S1 mapping. This upstream region contains a short ORF (30 aa) which is preceded by RBS-1. The presence of three inverted repeats, which can form two different conformations of the mRNA very similar to those of the control region of the macrolide-lincosamide streptogramine B resistance gene of pE194 [Horinouchi and Weisblum, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 77 (1980) 7079-7083; Gryczan et al., Nucl. Acids Res. 8 (1980) 6081-6097; Shivakumar et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 77 (1980) 3903-3907], suggests that the TcR gene is regulated by a translational attenuation mechanism. A Rho-independent transcriptional terminator structure is present immediately after the translational stop codon (TAA) of the TET protein. Comparison of the TET protein with the staphylococcal TcR proteins of pT181 revealed considerable homology.    Promoter-probe plasmid vectors were used to isolate putative promoter-containing DNA fragments of three Streptomyces antibiotic resistance genes, the rRNA methylase (tsr) gene of S. azureus, the aminoglycoside phosphotransferase (aph) gene of S. fradiae, and the viomycin phosphotransferase (vph) gene of S. vinaceus. DNA sequence analysis was carried out for all three of the fragments and for the protein-coding regions of the tsr and vph genes. No sequences resembling typical E. coli promoters or Bacillus vegetatively-expressed promoters were identified. Furthermore, none of the three DNA fragments found to be transcriptionally active in Streptomyces could initiate transcription when introduced into E. coli. An extremely biased codon usage pattern that reflects the high G + C composition of Streptomyces DNA was observed for the protein-coding regions of the tsr and vph genes, and of the previously sequenced aph gene. This pattern enabled delineation of the protein-coding region and identification of the coding strand of the genes.    The first Bacillus subtilis small, acid-soluble spore protein (SASP) gene has been cloned by using previously cloned B. megaterium SASP genes as DNA-DNA hybridization probes. Determination of the DNA sequence of the B. subtilis SASP gene showed that it codes for a 72-residue protein (termed SASP-1) containing a single spore protease cleavage site as well as other sequences conserved in Bacillus megaterium SASPs A, C, C-1, C-2, and C-3. The B. subtilis SASP-1 genes&apos;s coding sequence is preceded by a potential Bacillus ribosome-binding site, and is followed by a sequence that could form a stem-and-loop structure characteristic of transcription termination sites. Upstream from the coding sequence there are no obvious homologies with other B. subtilis sporulation genes, but similarities with B. megaterium SASP genes are evident. SASP-1 mRNA (290 bases long) is absent from vegetative cells, but appears midway in sporulation and then disappears. The cloned SASP-1 gene hybridizes to three bands other than the SASP-1 gene itself in EcoRI or HindIII digests of B. subtilis DNA. Presumably these other bands represent SASP genes related to the SASP-1 gene, and we have been able to detect at least three such proteins in B. subtilis spores.    An alkalophilic Bacillus DNA bank cloned in an expression probe plasmid, pGR71, was screened for the presence of developmentally regulated genetic elements. A 508-base pair HindIII fragment isolated from this bank in plasmid pGR71-5 expressed plasmid-encoded chloramphenicol resistance only during the sporulation phase of a Bacillus subtilis host grown on Schaeffer medium. This developmentally regulated expression was altered in spo0E and spo0H mutants which had very low levels of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase activity relative to the wild type or other spo0 mutants. We determined the nucleotide sequence of the entire 508-base pair fragment and located the site of regulated transcription initiation by high-resolution S1 nuclease mapping of the in vivo transcript. The deduced promoter sequences upstream from this start site were 5&apos;C-G-A-A-T-C-A-T-G-A3&apos; at -10 and 5&apos; A-G-G-A-A-T-C3&apos; at -35. This transcript was not detected in spo0E or spo0H mutants, indicating that the products of these genes control developmentally regulated chloramphenicol acetyltransferase expression at the level of transcription.    The up-to-date data on cytoplasmic tRNA genes, their number and structure, as well as organization in the genome and transcription are reviewed.    Effects of antibiotics acting on DNA gyrase, novobiocin and nalidixic acid on RNA synthesis during germination, vegetative growth and sporulation of Bacillus subtilis were examined. These drugs were relatively ineffective in inhibiting RNA synthesis of phase Gm 1 (5-15 min) during germination but effective in those of Gm 2 (15-40 min) and Gm 3 (40-60 min) during germination (Matsuda and Kameyama 1980). No distinguishable inhibitory effects of RNA synthesis in B. subtilis NOVr1TT mutant could be detected by novobiocin. RNA synthesis of Gm 2 and Gm 3 of this mutant was inhibited by nalidixic acid. When novobiocin was added to exponential vegetative cell or sporulating cell culture at T0 and T1 stage, the rate of RNA synthesis was inhibited by 80% for 5 min following addition of the drug. However, RNA synthesis after T2 of sporulation became resistant toward novobiocin, as was the case at an early stage of germination. RNA profiles from transcripts synthesized on administration of NOV suggested that the suppression of the synthesis of 23S and 16S rRNA is relatively greater than 4 to 5S RNA at the middle stage of germination and at vegetative growth stage in the presence of NOV. Our present data suggest that DNA gyrase is involved in the regulation of gene transcription during middle and late phases of germination, vegetative growth and T0 and T1 of sporulation. The transcription during early phase of germination and sporulation after T2 may proceed independently of this enzyme.    We have isolated and determined the 5&apos;-end nucleotide sequence of the alpha-amylase gene from Bacillus licheniformis ATCC 14580. The alpha-amylase produced by this strain is thermostable and of liquefying type. The gene was originally cloned in a bacteriophage lambda 1059 vector. A subclone containing a 5.3 X 10(3)-base insert in pBR322 was further characterized. The nucleotide sequence coding for the 5&apos; end of the structural gene together with the sequence coding for the upstream control regions was determined. The deduced N-terminal amino acid sequence was identical with the previously published amino acid sequence of B. licheniformis alpha-amylase. There was also very strong homology to the N-terminal sequence of Bacillus amyloliquefaciens alpha-amylase. The Mr of the thermostable alpha-amylase, as determined in vitro in a cell-free transcription/translation system of Escherichia coli, was about 55 000.    Bacteriophage SPO1 gene 33 and 34 products are required for SPO1 late gene transcription. Both proteins bind to the core RNA polymerase of the Bacillus subtilis host to direct the recognition of SPO1 late gene promoters, whose sequences differ from those of SPO1 early and middle gene promoters. We have located and cloned the genes for these two regulatory proteins, and have engineered their expression in Escherichia coli by placing them under the control of the bacteriophage lambda PL promoter. Nucleotide sequence analysis indicated that genes 33 and 34 overlap by 4 base-pairs and encode highly charged, slightly basic proteins of molecular weight 11,902 and 23,677, respectively.    An approx. 14-kb Sau3A fragment of Bacillus subtilis DNA containing the aroC and ser-22 genes has been isolated. Gene aroC is expressed in both B. subtilis and Escherichia coli and appears to contain its own promoter, allowing complementation in B. subtilis. However, expression in E. coli is dependent on insert orientation, so the direction of transcription can be deduced. The level of dehydroquinase-specific activity, encoded by the cloned aroC gene, is raised 30- to 40-fold in both E. coli and B. subtilis. The clones are stable in both E. coli and B. subtilis but appear to have undergone several large deletions during their construction.    To analyse the control of chloramphenicol (Cm) resistance conferred by the Staphylococcus aureus plasmid pUB112, a detailed restriction map of this plasmid has been constructed, and the position and orientation of the cat gene have been determined. An MboI restriction fragment carrying the entire cat gene of pUB112 was then cloned in another S. aureus plasmid, the kanamycin (Km) resistance vector pUB110. Depending on the orientation of the incorporated cat fragment, the level of Cm resistance varied dramatically in Bacillus subtilis cells. This effect could not be eliminated by deleting parts of the vector DNA, and only the introduction of a transcription termination signal led to orientation-independent Cm resistance. One such construct was further developed to yield a shuttle vector, replicating both in Escherichia coli and B. subtilis. Using this vector the expression of incorporated genes can be determined in both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. By in vitro transcription experiments using pUB110 DNA linearized with various restriction endonucleases as template, two pUB110 promoters could be localized and their orientations determined: one promoter controls a gene whose function is unknown, the other regulates the transcription of the KmR gene.    Sigma-28-RNA polymerase is a minor form of RNA polymerase found in vegetative cells of Bacillus subtilis which utilizes promoter sites distinct from those recognized by the major RNA polymerase. We have isolated a collection of cloned B. subtilis DNA segments that contain in vitro promoter sites for sigma 28-RNA polymerase by screening a bacteriophage lambda library of B. subtilis genomic fragments. At least nine new sigma 28-specific promoter sites have been identified in this collection, and four have been partially mapped for further study. Our strategy employed a mix of RNA probes prepared by in vitro transcription with sigma 28-RNA polymerase of total B. subtilis DNA EcoRI and HindIII fragments. Over 70% of the unique clones identified contain sigma 28-specific promoter sites, suggesting that the method may have general application for identification of promoter-containing sequences. The efficiency with which sigma 28-specific promoters are detected is consistent with there being a relatively small number of such sites in the B. subtilis genome of which twelve have been cloned.    The glutamine synthetase gene (glnA) of Bacillus subtilis was purified from a library of B. subtilis DNA cloned in phage lambda. By mapping the locations of previously identified mutations in the glnA locus it was possible to correlate the genetic and physical maps. Mutations known to affect expression of the glnA gene and other genes were mapped within the coding region for glutamine synthetase, as determined by measuring the sizes of truncated, immunologically cross-reacting polypeptides coded for by various sub-cloned regions of the glnA gene. When the entire B. subtilis glnA gene was present on a plasmid it was capable of directing synthesis in Escherichia coli of B. subtilis glutamine synthetase as judged by enzymatic activity, antigenicity, and ability to allow growth of a glutamine auxotroph. By use of the cloned B. subtilis glnA gene as a hybridization probe, it was shown that the known variability of glutamine synthetase specific activity during growth in various nitrogen sources is fully accounted for by changes in glnA mRNA levels.    Sporulation of Bacillus subtilis involves sequential morphological and biochemical changes and is regulated by specific genes (spo genes) estimated to occupy more than 30 loci. A mutation in any one of these genes blocks the sporulation process at the corresponding developmental stage. Despite intensive genetic studies, the nature and function of the spo gene products remain unknown. Vegetative B. subtilis RNA polymerase core enzyme may interact with several sigma factors and discriminate among different classes of promoters. During sporulation, new polypeptides are associated with the core enzyme which may have a central role in modifying its promoter recognition specificity. As a first step to understanding their function in the switch from vegetative to sporulation mode, several early sporulation genes have been cloned and analysed. Here we report the cloning and nucleotide sequence of the spoIIG gene of B. subtilis. This gene encodes a polypeptide with a predicted relative molecular mass of 27,652 which contains a 65-amino acid region highly homologous to an internal part of the Escherichia coli sigma factor.    The Bacillus subtilis phage SP01, whose DNA contains 5-hydroxymethyluracil (hmUra) in place of thymine, codes for an abundant, small, basic protein called TF1. TF1 binds preferentially to hydroxymethyluracil-containing DNA and thereby selectively inhibits transcription of such DNA in vitro. The gene for TF1 has been sequenced. We find that this viral protein is a homologue of the ubiquitous bacterial type II DNA-binding proteins. The three-dimensional structure of one of these bacterial proteins has recently been determined. We are able to discern common as well as distinctive features in the amino acid sequence and the three-dimensional structure of the homologous viral protein.    The spo0B gene is one of the genes involved in initiation of sporulation of Bacillus subtilis. This gene, previously cloned into the pHV33 shuttle vector, is expressed in Escherichia coli and B. subtilis. We have determined the sequence of 1118 base pairs (bp) of the DNA insert carrying the spo0B gene. The promoter sequence of this gene shows the canonical T-A-T-A-A-T region at 10 bp from the transcriptional start (-10 region) but an unusual sequence, T-T-T-T-C-T-, in the -35 region. The nucleotide sequence shows an open reading frame encoding a 192-amino-acid polypeptide of Mr 22,542, which is close to the molecular weight of the spo0B product synthesized in E. coli minicells. To investigate the regulation of the spo0B gene under a variety of physiological conditions, we constructed an in-frame fusion between the spo0B promoter proximal region and the lacZ gene of E. coli. This hybrid gene was subsequently integrated into the B. subtilis chromosome, and the beta-galactosidase activity was measured. It was found that the spo0B gene is preferentially expressed during exponential growth; it is not induced by exhaustion of the growth medium nor repressed by glucose.    The fumarase (citG) gene of Bacillus subtilis 168 has been identified in a collection of lambda phages carrying EcoRI-generated fragments of B. subtilis DNA. Regions of the cloned DNA have been subcloned into plasmid vectors, and the ability of prophages and multicopy plasmids to complement Escherichia coli and B. subtilis fumarate mutations has been examined. Two EcoRI fragments of 1.5 and 5.1 kb are both required for fumarase expression in E. coli and B. subtilis. The level of fumarase activity from a single copy of the B. subtilis citG gene expressed in E. coli is approximately one-tenth of that from the normal E. coli gene; the level is increased by expression from a pBR322-derived multicopy plasmid. The citG gene has been located within the cloned DNA by transposon mutagenesis and by expression studies, which have also identified a polypeptide of Mr 49000 as the product of the citG gene. The properties of a truncated derivative of this polypeptide have indicated the direction of transcription of the citG gene.    The nucleotide sequence of the control region of the trp operon of Bacillus subtilis has been determined. The region was shown to contain the trp promoter by deletion analysis and by determination of the transcription start site. The trp promoter shows similarity to the consensus sequence for Escherichia coli and B. subtilis promoters. The presence of the trp control region on a high-copy-number plasmid confers resistance to the tryptophan analogue 5-methyltryptophan. It appears that an approximately 120-base-pair region comprising not only the trp promoter but also adjacent direct repeat sequences is necessary to confer 5-methyltryptophan resistance. We postulate that this region is involved in tryptophan regulation and confers 5-methyltryptophan resistance by titration of a trp regulatory protein. Removal of either the trp promoter or the adjacent direct repeat sequences abolished the 5-methyltryptophan-resistance phenotype. Placement of unrelated promoters adjacent to the direct repeat sequences restored 5-methyltryptophan resistance. This suggests that promoter activity is necessary for the regulatory function.    The alpha-amylase gene, originally isolated by molecular cloning from chromosomal DNA of Bacillus amyloliquefaciens, is efficiently expressed from its own promoter in a Bacillus subtilis host when present in the multicopy plasmid vector pUB110. The flanking regions of this gene were sequenced and the ends of the in vivo-generated messenger RNA were mapped by the S1 procedure. Outside the coding sequence, the mRNA for alpha-amylase contains about 30 nucleotides at the 5&apos; end and 51 nucleotides at the 3&apos; end. The promoter region has -10 sequence TAAAAT starting eleven nucleotides upstream from the transcription start point, pppU, and the -35 hexanucleotide TTGTTA is separated from it by 16 nucleotides. As indicated by its sequence, the terminator is bidirectional and of the rho-independent kind, and the mRNA can form a long hairpin structure at the very 3&apos; end. The 3&apos; terminus of the transcript does not seem to include a U stretch, although the DNA template codes for U3AU6 at the 3&apos; end of the hairpin sequence. The bulk of the amylase mRNA does not contain any 3&apos;-terminal poly(A).    Temperate Bacillus subtilis phage SPO2 codes for a phage-specific DNA polymerase. The polymerase gene has been cloned, and its nucleotide sequence has been determined. Within the sequence there is an open reading frame starting with a TTG and ending with three consecutive translational stop codons. Ten base pairs upstream from the proposed TTG initiation codon there is a probable ribosome-binding site with a calculated free energy of interaction with the 3&apos; end of B. subtilis 16S rRNA of -15 kcal (-63 kJ)/mol. Based on the sequence and the expression of the polymerase gene in three different hybrid plasmids, we conclude that this open reading frame is the structural gene for SPO2 DNA polymerase. The predicted molecular weight of the polymerase is 72,486. In hybrid plasmid pJB74, the terminal triplet of an open reading frame with coding capacity for a protein of ca. 10 kilodaltons overlaps with the translational initiation triplet TTG of the polymerase gene. We speculate that transcription and translation of this open reading frame can influence the amount of phage DNA polymerase made in SPO2-infected bacteria.    cat-86 specifies chloramphenicol acetyltransferase and is the indicator gene on the Bacillus subtilis promoter cloning plasmid pPL703. Insertion of promoters from various sources into pPL703 at a site ca. 144 base pairs upstream from cat-86 activates expression of cat-86, and the expression is characteristically inducible by chloramphenicol. Thus, chloramphenicol inducibility of cat-86 is independent of the promoter that is used to activate the gene. To determine whether cat-86 or its products were involved in chloramphenicol inducibility, gene replacement studies were performed. cat-86 consists of 220 codons. The lacZ gene from Escherichia coli was inserted into a promoter-containing derivative of pPL703, plasmid pPL603E, at two locations within cat-86. pPL3lac2 contains lacZ inserted in frame after codon 2 of cat-86. pPL3lac30 contains lacZ inserted in frame after codon 30 of cat-86. In both constructions, all cat coding sequences 3&apos; to the site of the lacZ insertion were deleted. Both plasmids exhibited chloramphenicol inducibility of beta-galactosidase in B. subtilis. These studies provide the first direct demonstration that the transcription and translation products of a chloramphenicol-inducible cat gene are uninvolved in chloramphenicol inducibility of gene expression. The results localize the region essential to inducibility to the 144-base pair segment that intervenes between the site of promoter insertion and the cat-86 gene.    Recombinant plasmids containing the mosquitocidal delta-endotoxin gene were constructed by inserting HindIII fragments of the Bacillus thuringiensis var. israelensis 72-75 Md plasmid in to the Escherichia coli vector pUC12. Two recombinants producing the 26 000 Da delta-endotoxin (pIP173 and pIP174) were identified by screening clones in an E. coli in vitro transcription-translation system. Both recombinants were 12.4 kb chimaeric plasmids comprising pUC12 and a common 9.7 kb HindIII fragment of the B. thuringiensis plasmid. The 26 000 Da polypeptide synthesis in vivo from pIP174 transformed into E. coli JM101 was lethal to mosquito larvae and cytotoxic to mosquito cells in vitro. The biological authenticity of the cloned product was further confirmed by demonstrating that the cytotoxicity of the polypeptide was neutralised by antiserum to the authentic delta-endotoxin or by preincubation with excess toxin receptor. Transcription of the recombinant delta-endotoxin gene in E. coli appears to utilise a Bacillus promoter sequence(s) rather than the pUC12 beta-galactosidase promotor.    Using molecular cloning techniques, a clone containing a 7-kb insert of Spiroplasma species BC3 DNA that hybridized strongly to total labeled Spiroplasma tRNA was identified. Sequence analysis of a portion of this recombinant plasmid identified a cluster of tRNA genes. The gene order was as follows: tRNACys-tRNAArg-tRNAPro-tRNAAla-tRNAMet-tRNAIle and a portion of tRNASer All the genes encode the 3&apos;-terminal CCA and have very high A + T and relatively long intergenic regions. An RNA polymerase promoter site was found upstream of the tRNACys gene. The tRNA gene cluster found in Spiroplasma can be compared with a similar Bacillus subtilis gene cluster, which raises interesting questions concerning gene organization and transcription.    We have previously shown that Bacillus licheniformis prepenicillinase is modified and processed to form membrane-bound penicillinase in Escherichia coli which contains N-acylglyceride-cysteine27 at the NH2 terminus. In the present study, we have constructed, by in vitro site-directed mutagenesis, two mutant penicillinase genes in which the modification site (the 27th cysteine residue in prepenicillinase) is either converted into serine (penPSer27) or is deleted along with the preceding four residues (Ala23 to Cys27, delta penP2327). The modification, processing, and subcellular localization of these two mutant penicillinases in E. coli cells were studied. Our results indicate that the delta penP2327 deletion mutant prepenicillinase is largely metabolically inert and the unmodified and uncleaved form is associated with the membrane fraction; a small fraction (about 7-9%) appears to contain glyceride-modified prepenicillinase (presumably at the Cys-21 position) which is not cleaved. In contrast, the Cys-27 in equilibrium Ser-27 point mutant prepenicillinase is processed into two forms which contain Asn-29 and Ser-35 at their NH2 termini, respectively, and the bulk of the processed penicillinase appears to be located in the peri-plasm. These results are discussed in terms of the substrate specificities of signal peptidases in E. coli.    The promoter region of Bacillus subtilis subtilisin E was found to be composed of two overlapping promoters with their transcription starting sites separated from each other by 15 base pairs (Wong, S.-L., Price, C. W., Goldfarb, D. S., and Doi, R. H. (1984) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 81, 1184-1188). At least one of the promoters is transcribed by a minor form of B. subtilis RNA polymerase with a sigma factor of 37,000 daltons. In vitro transcription analyses and in vivo studies with promoter probe plasmids pKO-1 and pCED-6 demonstrated that Escherichia coli RNA polymerase was able to initiate transcription from the subtilisin promoter cluster. S1 nuclease-mapping studies with both in vivo and in vitro transcribed RNA from E. coli and B. subtilis illustrate that E. coli can initiate transcription from both promoters with the same transcription start points as B. subtilis. The promoter strength of this promoter cluster in E. coli, as expressed in terms of galactokinase units, was 64 units and represents weak promoter activity in the E. coli system. These data indicate that either the single E. coli RNA polymerase is able to recognize the minor sigma 37 promoter or E. coli contains a hitherto unrecognized minor RNA polymerase holoenzyme which is capable of recognizing a B. subtilis sigma 37 promoter. On the other hand the B. subtilis RNA polymerase holoenzymes have been quite promoter-specific in our experiments to date.    The pneumococcal recombinant plasmid pLS70, which contains two strong promoters for transcription of the malM and malX genes, is unstable when transferred to Bacillus subtilis, and it gives rise to deleted derivatives. Analysis of proteins produced by the deleted plasmids and restriction mapping of 29 different deletions showed that stabilization in B. subtilis was accompanied by deletions affecting both promoters. Plasmids containing even a single strong promoter were at a selective disadvantage. Nucleotide sequences surrounding the deletions in 10 plasmids were determined. Six different deletions occurred between directly repeated sequences of 3-13 base pairs in length, presumably by a recombination mechanism involving short homologies. Four deletions occurred between sites not contained within repeated sequences. A weak but significant similarity of an 11-base sequence was found surrounding these deletions and the corresponding points of junction in the progenitor plasmids. It is suggested that this sequence may be the recognition site for a topoisomerase-like enzyme that can produce deletions.    We have determined a sequence of 2073 bp from two recombinant plasmids carrying the whole spoIIA locus from Bacillus subtilis, the expression of which is required for spore formation. The sequence contains three long open reading frames (ORFs), each of them being preceded by a ribosome binding site. These three putative proteins (mol. wts 13100, 16300 and 22200) are likely to be expressed and are probably encoded on the same mRNA. The stop codon of ORF1 overlaps with the start codon of ORF2 suggesting that there might be translational coupling between the two ORFs. Although some known promoter sequences were found, the only one upstream from the first open reading frame is about 260 bp from it.    Plasmids carrying different portions of the polycistronic spoIIA locus, and unable to replicate autonomously in Bacillus subtilis, were able to transform a Spo+ B. subtilis strain, BR151, for the plasmid-determined chloramphenicol resistance by Campbell-like insertion into the region of homology on the chromosome. Two such plasmids, pPP35 and pPP36, yielded Spo- transformants, indicating that the cloned regions of these plasmids were entirely within the chromosomal spoIIA transcriptional unit. The cloned regions overlapped the end of a known spoIIA cistron, so that the transcriptional unit was larger than this cistron, and was polycistronic. This is the first demonstration of such a polycistronic sporulation transcriptional unit. The DNA sequence of the region has now been determined (given in an accompanying paper) and suggests a transcriptional unit with three open reading frames. Two other plasmids yielded Spo+ transformants of BR151, and these define the outer limits of the transcriptional unit. The adjacent sporulation locus identified by the spoV A89 mutation was not part of the same transcriptional unit.    The sequence of a 1409 base pair restriction fragment containing the B. subtilis gene for (1-3), (1-4)-beta-D-glucan endoglucanase is reported. The gene is encoded in a 726 base pair segment. The deduced amino acid sequence of the protein has a hydrophobic signal peptide at the NH2-terminus similar to those found in five other secreted proteins from Bacillus. The gene is preceded by a sequence resembling promoters for the vegetative B. subtilis RNA polymerase. This is followed by a sequence resembling a B. subtilis ribosome binding site nine nucleotides before the first codon of the gene. Two sequences, one before and one after the gene, can be arranged in secondary structures similar to transcriptional terminators. There is also a short open reading frame coding for a hydrophobic protein on the minus strand just upstream from the beta-glucanase gene. A possible role for this gene in the control of expression of beta-glucanase is suggested.    Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene ADE4 encoding glutamine phosphoribosylpyrophosphate amidotransferase (amidophosphoribosyltransferase) has been cloned by complementation of an ade4 auxotroph. The nucleotide sequence of ADE4 along with upstream and downstream flanking sequences was determined. The ADE4 structural gene consists of 1530 base pairs from which a 510-amino acid translation product, Mr = 56,691, was deduced. Yeast amidophosphoribosyltransferase is homologous to the enzymes from Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis. The active site cysteine residue in the bacterial amidophosphoribosyltransferases which functions in glutamine amide transfer is conserved in the yeast enzyme. Yeast amidophosphoribosyltransferase does not contain the previously deduced sequence required for binding of a [4Fe-4S] center indicating that a [4Fe-4S] center is an unlikely component of the yeast enzyme. Amidophosphoribosyltransferase was stable in growing and nongrowing cells and was not inactivated or degraded. Thus in the group, S. cerevisiae, E. coli, B. subtilis, the content of a [4Fe-4S] cluster in amidophosphoribosyltransferase correlates with a mechanism for oxygen-dependent inactivation of the enzyme. Northern blots demonstrate that ADE4 expression is transcriptionally regulated. The 5&apos; end of the ADE4 mRNA was identified by nuclease S1 mapping.    A 471-base pair HindIII DNA fragment of Bacillus subtilis contains two overlapping promoters which are recognized in vitro by sigma 55- and sigma 37-containing RNA polymerase holoenzymes from B. subtilis. In vitro transcript analyses and S1 nuclease mapping experiments with in vivo RNA indicate that both enzymes initiate transcription from the same putative +1 site. Physiological studies with the promoter-containing DNA fragment inserted into the expression probe plasmid pCED6 and quantitative S1 nuclease mapping experiments with RNA isolated from various stages of growth indicate that expression from these overlapping promoters is greater during the early stationary phase than during growth. We propose that the cryptic gene controlled by these promoters is transcribed by the sigma 55 enzyme during growth and by the sigma 37 enzyme during early stationary phase.    The formation of endospores in the Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis proceeds according to a temporally ordered program of gene activation. To investigate timing mechanisms in sporulation gene expression, we have isolated and sequenced the promoter region for a B. subtilis gene known as 0.3 kb whose transcription is switched on at about stage III of development. The 5&apos; terminus of the 0.3 kb mRNA was mapped by the S1 nuclease procedure to a position just upstream from its apparent ribosome binding site and initiation codon and just downstream from the transcription termination site for an adjacent gene. This information enabled us to construct a transcriptional fusion in which the 5&apos; region of the 0.3 kb gene was joined to the lacZ gene of Escherichia coli. When introduced into cells of B. subtilis, the 0.3 kb-lacZ fusion caused the synthesis of a fusion-specified RNA that originated from within the 0.3 kb promoter region and extended into the adjacent E. coli DNA, and the induction of beta-galactosidase synthesis at the third to fourth hour of sporulation. Enzyme synthesis required the 0.3 kb promoter, since a deletion of the 5&apos; region of the 0.3 kb gene in the transcription fusion eliminated the production of beta-galactosidase. Induction of the 0.3 kb-lacZ fusion was under developmental control, since the production of beta-galactosidase was blocked or substantially impaired by chromosomal mutations in the sporulation genes spoOB, spoIIA, spoIIE and spoIIIE, but not by a spoIIC mutation. We conclude that the 0.3 kb gene promoter is subject to a developmental clock, which delays its utilization until an intermediate stage of sporulation, and discuss models for how the timing of gene expression is regulated.    Bacillus subtilis phage SPR codes for a DNA methyltransferase (Mtase) which methylates the 5&apos; cytosine in the sequence GGCC and both cytosines in the sequence CCGG. A 2126-bp fragment of SPR DNA containing the Mtase gene has been sequenced. This fragment has only one significant open reading frame of 1347 bp, which corresponds to the Mtase gene. Within the sequence the Mtase promoter has been defined by S1 mapping. The size of the SPR Mtase predicted from the deduced amino acid composition is 49.9 kDal. This is in agreement with both the Mr of the purified enzyme and with that of the SPR Mtase gene product identified here by minicell technique. Base changes leading to mutants affected in Mtase activity were localized within the Mtase gene.    A 5300-bp DNA segment containing the promoter, the attenuator and the first gene (hisG) of the Escherichia coli his operon has been inserted into an interspecific E. coli-Bacillus subtilis plasmid vector, pHV14. The resulting plasmid pPV48 restores the His+ phenotype to an E. coli hisG mutant, but fails to do so to a corresponding B. subtilis mutant. Experiments aimed at localizing the block to this heterologous expression in B. subtilis have shown that the enzymatic activity of the hisG+ gene product is neither detectable nor inhibited in crude extracts of B. subtilis cells harboring pPV48. Furthermore, electron microscopic, Southern blot and S1 mapping analysis of the transcripts produced in vitro and in vivo by B. subtilis RNA polymerase indicate that the hisG+ region is transcribed, but that the transcripts initiate at sites different from the his promoter, converge towards, and terminate in the vicinity of the attenuator.    The cat-86 gene in plasmid pPL603 specifies chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) and is selectively expressed in Bacillus subtilis at a stage in sporulation in which internal spores are first observed (approximately T8). The gene is unexpressed in vegetatively growing cells. cat-86 expression and spore formation are both blocked when cells are grown in excess glucose. cat-86 expression at T8 is due to selective transcription of the gene, since cat-86 mRNA is undetectable in vegetatively growing cells but is readily demonstrated in sporulating cells. The transcription start site for cat-86 mRNA from sporulating cells is within a 203-base-pair restriction fragment designated P1, which is located upstream from the cat coding region on pPL603 . Deletion of P1 from pPL603 eliminates the sporulation -associated expression of cat-86. Host sporulation genes, whose function is absolutely required for cat-86 expression at T8, include six early sporulation, spo0 , genes and spoIIE . Therefore, pPL603 provides a novel system in which the in vivo expression of a known, plasmid-linked gene is dependent on sporulation-specific changes in B. subtilis.    The effects of varying the intracellular levels of GTP or UTP on the rate of RNA synthesis in Bacillus subtilis were studied. The levels of these nucleotides were manipulated by pyrimidine limitation in a pyr auxotroph, by purine limitation in a pur auxotroph, or by the addition of decoyinine , which specifically inhibits GMP synthesis. Decreased levels of UTP and GTP were accompanied by dramatically decreased synthesis and accumulation of stable RNAs (tRNA and rRNA), but mRNA synthesis was less affected. However, sporulation was initiated only when the intracellular level of GTP decreased.    Several sites specifying transcription termination in the bacteriophage SP01 terminal repeat have recently been located and characterized. Some of these were identified as partial terminators. Further characterization of three of the partial terminators leads to the conclusion that they are not sites of inefficient transcriptional termination by Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase. Rather, these are sites where termination is either completely efficient or fails to occur at all, depending upon the ribonucleoside triphosphate (rNTP) concentration in the reaction mixture. The threshold rNTP concentration, above which termination will not occur, is the same for two of the terminators studied here and different for the third.    The nucleotide sequence of the Bacillus megaterium protein C gene, encompassing the coding region and 341 base pairs of flanking regions, has been determined. The gene codes for a 72-residue protein whose predicted amino acid sequence is identical to that previously determined for protein C with the exception of an amino-terminal methionine predicted from the gene sequence, but not found in the mature protein. The translational initiation codon is preceded by an 11-base pair sequence highly complementary to the 3&apos; terminus of B. megaterium 16S rRNA. Protection against S1 nuclease digestion by hybridization of a protein C gene fragment to RNA containing high levels of protein C mRNA localized the transcription initiation site 108 base pairs upstream from the translation start site. Upstream from the transcription initiation site there are no obvious homologies with conserved regions of promoters for previously described B. subtilis vegetative or sporulation genes.    Plasmid pPL603 is a promoter cloning vector for Bacillus subtilis and consists of a 1.1-kilobase fragment of Bacillus pumilus DNA inserted between the EcoRI and BamHI sites of pUB110. The gene cat-86, specifying chloramphenicol-inducible chloramphenicol acetyltransferase, is located on the 1.1-kilobase cloned DNA. When pPL603 is present in B. subtilis, cat-86 is unexpressed during vegetative growth but expressed during sporulation. The regulation of cat-86 in pPL603 is due to sequences within two restriction fragments, designated P1 and R1, that precede the main coding portion of the gene. The P1 fragment promotes transcription of cat-86 only during sporulation, whereas the adjacent R1 fragment lacks promoter function but contains sequences essential to chloramphenicol inducibility. A second B. pumilus gene, cat-66, was cloned in B. subtilis and is expressed throughout the vegetative growth and sporulation cycle. The cat-66 coding region is preceded by two adjacent restriction fragments designated as P2 and R2. P1 and P2 are identical in size and share 95% conservation of base sequence. R1 and R2 are also identical in size and share 91% conservation of base sequence. Fragment substitution experiments demonstrate that R2 can functionally replace R1. The substitution of P2 for P1 promotes cat-86 expression throughout vegetative growth and sporulation. Analysis of a derivative of pPL603 in which P2 has replaced P1 demonstrates that P2 promotes transcription of cat-86 during vegetative growth and that P2 contains the start site for transcription of cat-86. Thus, P1 and P2 differ strikingly in vegetative promoter function, yet they differ by single-base substitutions at only 11 positions of 203.    The pneumococcal mal recombinant plasmid pLS70, which carries two strong promoters for transcription, could not be transferred and maintained intact in Bacillus subtilis. Although it could be established at low frequency, pLS70 was unstable and was rapidly replaced by deleted forms of the plasmid. A deleted derivative plasmid, pLS69, could be transferred at high frequency and maintained intact. In pLS69 the deletion reduces function of both the malM (amylomaltase) and malX (X-fragment) promoters. This mutant mal plasmid still codes for an intact amylomaltase, and the enzyme is produced in both S. pneumoniae and B. subtilis. The amylomaltase, which is inducible by maltose in S. pneumoniae, is synthesized constitutively in B. subtilis and is localized in the cytosol. Although pLS69 enables S. pneumoniae to grow with maltose, the plasmid did not enhance the ability of B. subtilis to use this sugar, presumably because the latter does not transport free maltose into the cell. Minicells of B. subtilis containing pLS69 synthesized the amylomaltase polypeptide but no X-fragment. In S. pneumoniae carrying pLS69, production of the X-fragment is also reduced more than the amylomaltase, when compared to cells carrying pLS70, which produce equal amounts of the two proteins. Inasmuch as the down promoter mutation leaves unchanged both structural genes, their ribosome-binding sites and -10 and -35 promoter sequences, the unequal effect is attributed to differential reduction in AT composition proximal to the promoters. Vector proteins were revealed in minicells as several bands, all located in the cytosol except for an Mr 35000 polypeptide located in the membrane.    Gene 28 of bacteriophage SPO1 encodes an RNA polymerase sigma factor sigma gp28, which replaces the host Bacillus subtilis sigma subunit sigma 55, to alter the promoter recognition specificity of RNA polymerase. A fragment of SPO1 DNA containing gene 28 was placed under the control of the PL promoter of bacteriophage lambda in an Escherichia coli expression vector. When transcription of gene 28 was induced by derepression of PL, the sigma gp28 synthesized constituted several per cent of total cellular protein. Sigma gp28 purified from these cells was able to confer specificity for SPO1 middle gene promoters upon B. subtilis core RNA polymerase, and also enabled E. coli core RNA polymerase to recognize and initiate transcription from an SPO1 middle gene promoter.    Bacillus subtilis possesses at least five different forms of RNA polymerase holoenzyme which are distinguished by their sigma subunit and their promoter recognition specificity. Sigma-37 RNA polymerase, a minor form of RNA polymerase, recognizes a class of promoters, which includes promoters for genes transcribed early during endospore formation. We have used site-directed bisulfite mutagenesis to construct a series of single and multiple base substitutions in a promoter recognized by sigma-37 RNA polymerase. In vitro transcription analysis of this series of mutant promoters demonstrated that single base substitutions at positions -36, -16, -15 and -14 most dramatically reduced the efficiency of promoter utilization by sigma-37 RNA polymerase. These results support a model in which sigma-37 RNA polymerase recognizes its cognate promoters by interacting with a sequence of nucleotides near the -10 region and the -35 region of the promoter--a sequence not recognized by B. subtilis sigma-55 RNA polymerase or Escherichia coli RNA polymerase.    The +1 site for initiation of inducible chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) mRNA encoded by plasmid pC194 was determined experimentally by using [alpha-32P]ATP-labeled runoff transcripts partially digested with T1 RNase. By partial digestion of the in vitro transcripts with S1, T1, and cobra venom nucleases as probes of mRNA conformation, single- and double-stranded regions, respectively, were also identified. Thus, a prominent inverted complementary repeat sequence was demonstrated spanning the +14 to +50 positions, which contain the complementary sequences CCUCC and GGAGG (the Shine and Dalgarno sequence for synthesis of CAT) symmetrically apposed and paired as part of a perfect 12-base-pair inverted complementary repeat sequence (-19.5 kcal [ca. -81.7 kJ] per mol). The CAT mRNA was stable to digestion by T1 RNase at the four guanosine residues in the Shine and Dalgarno sequence GGAGG , even at 60 degrees C, suggesting that nascent CAT mRNA allows ribosomes to initiate protein synthesis inefficiently and that induction involves post-transcriptional unmasking of the Shine and Dalgarno sequence. Consistent with this model of regulation, we found that cells carrying pC194 , induced with chloramphenicol, contain about the same concentration of pulse-labeled CAT-specific RNA as do uninduced cells. Induction of CAT synthesis by the non- acetylatable chloramphenicol analog fluorothiamphenicol was tested by using minicells of Bacillus subtilis carrying pC194 as well as minicells containing the cloned pC194 derivatives in which parts of the CAT structural gene were deleted in vitro with BAL 31 exonuclease.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)    Current knowledge of enzymic editing mechanisms in DNA replication, transcription and translation can be used to predict error rates in the absence of editing. Primitive enzymes which possessed synthetic activity but not yet editing mechanisms would have had extremely high error rates resulting in heterogeneous proteins. Based on present knowledge of molecular biology and biochemistry, it is concluded that the evolution of contemporary information transfer systems from primitive systems lacking such editing mechanisms remains an unsolved problem in theoretical biology.    A fragment of Bacillus plasmid pAB124 carrying the genes encoding tetracycline resistance was previously cloned into Escherichia coli plasmid pSF2124 (S.J. Eccles, A. Docherty, I. Chopra, S. Shales, and P. Ball, J. Bacteriol. 145:1417-1420, 1981). The cloned pAB124 tet fragment conferred low-level resistance in E. coli, but exposure of this strain to a subinhibitory level of tetracycline led to selection of a mutant plasmid in which high-level resistance, associated with decreased drug accumulation, was expressed constitutively. In this plasmid, the Bacillus tet determinant appeared to be transcribed from a promoter on the vector. Construction of tetracycline-sensitive derivatives of this plasmid by transposon insertion mutagenesis allowed identification of a 32,000-dalton membrane-located protein, which apparently promoted decreased accumulation of tetracycline. This protein was also synthesized as a 32,000-dalton polypeptide in a coupled, in vitro transcription-translation system directed by plasmid DNA. The pAB124 tet determinant differed from the tetA through tetD determinants found in gram-negative bacteria in DNA-DNA hybridization and in the ability to prevent accumulation of different tetracycline derivatives, but was closely related to the tet determinant of another plasmid isolated from Bacillus species, pBC16.    Three EcoRI fragments of Bacillus megaterium DNA hybridized only under nonrestrictive conditions on Southern blots to a probe containing the previously cloned gene for protein C, a small, acid-soluble spore protein (SASP) from B. megaterium. All three fragments were cloned in Escherichia coli cells in plasmid pBR325, and after being transferred to an E. coli expression vector, one of the fragments (C-3) directed the synthesis of a new small, acid-soluble spore protein (termed C-3) immunologically related to protein C. As previously observed with the protein C gene, protein C-3 gene expression in E. coli required an external promoter and suppression of termination of transcription. Protein C-3 was purified from induced E. coli cells, and its immunological properties, electrophoretic mobility, amino acid composition, and amino-terminal sequence were determined. These data indicated that protein C-3 was related, but not identical, to either protein C or the closely related protein A--two of the major small, acid-soluble spore proteins of B. megaterium. Detailed examination of acid extracts of B. megaterium spores showed that they contained a minor protein which comigrated with C-3 on acrylamide gel electrophoresis at low pH and reacted immunologically like C-3.    The Escherichia coli RNA polymerase bound to phage phi 29 DNA has been visualized by electron microscopy. Thirteen specific binding sites have been observed at 1.7,2.6,5.5,10.4,13.7,25.2,25.7,26.3,33.5,59.5,69.2,91.7 and 99.6 DNA length units and they have been named A1,A1I,A1II,A1III,A1IV,A2,A2I, A3, A4,B1,B1I,C1 and C2, respectively. The binding sites A1,A2,A3,B1,C1 and C2 coincide with those found with Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase. The transcription of phage phi 29 DNA with B. subtilis or E. coli RNA polymerases has been studied. With the B. subtilis RNA polymerase eight transcripts were found, starting at positions corresponding to the binding sites A1, A1III, A2,A3,B1I,B2,C1 and C2, respectively. With the E. coli RNA polymerase the same transcripts were found and a new one starting at position corresponding to the A4 binding site. The RNAs starting at binding sites A1,A1III,A2,B1I, B2,C1 and C2 are transcribed from right to left, as expected for early RNA. The RNAs which initiate at positions A3 and A4 are transcribed from left to right and probably correspond to late RNAs.    We have determined the sequence of a 1228 base-pair cloned DNA fragment from Bacillus licheniformis capable of specifically complementing mutations in the spoOH gene, which is required for the early stage of sporulation in B. subtilis. The sequence has only one long open reading frame consisting of 168 codons. In vivo and in vitro transcription mapping studies indicate the size of complementary RNA to be around 1 kb with the 5&apos; initiation site at base 79 and the 3&apos; termination site in the area of base 1138. This indicates the presence of a 5&apos; untranslated RNA and a fairly long 3&apos; extension. The promoter sequence of this gene is 5&apos;TATAAT3&apos; at -10, and 5&apos;TTGACG3&apos; at -35, a typical E. coli-like promoter sequence, and is transcribed in vitro specifically only by RNA polymerase containing delta 55 and not delta 37-containing holoenzyme.    A 2.8-kilobase fragment of the Bacillus subtilis chromosome containing a functional spo0H gene was cloned by using a modification of the helper system described by T. Gryczan and co-workers (T. Gryczan, S. Contente, and D. Dubnau, Mol. Gen. Genet. 177:459-467, 1980). The chromosomal segment specifically complements spo0H mutations in recE4 strains and when integrated into the chromosome of Rec+ strains maps in the spo0H region of the B. subtilis genome. A deletion within the transcribed region of the cloned spo0H gene was constructed which abolishes its spo0H+-complementing activity. DNA sequences containing this deletion were introduced into a B. subtilis Rec+ strain containing the spo0H75 mutation. The absence of recombination between the deletion and the spo0H mutation indicates that both reside in the same gene. There is homology between the B. subtilis spo0H gene and a 1.2-kilobase chromosomal fragment from Bacillus licheniformis which also complements B. subtilis spo0H mutations. In vivo transcription mapping experiments have shown that the B. subtilis spo0H gene is transcribed during vegetative growth as well as during sporulation.    A cloned Bacillus subtilis gene (sprE) expressed only during the stationary growth phase is shown to encode the subtilisin E protease, an enzyme associated with sporulation. We have determined the DNA sequence of the sprE promoter region and the promoter-proximal half of the structural gene. The sprE gene codes for a putative 29-residue signal peptide and a 77-residue leader peptide preceding the mature subtilisin sequence. By plasmid integration and phage PBS1 transduction, we have mapped the sprE locus between glyB and metD on the B. subtilis chromosome, a region also containing the hyperprotease-producing hpr gene. In vitro the sprE gene is transcribed by the minor form of RNA polymerase containing a 37,000-dalton sigma factor (sigma 37). We show by S1 nuclease mapping that sprE transcription initiates at dual start sites both in vitro and in vivo and that the promoter for the downstream site has a characteristic sigma 37 recognition sequence. We propose that the physiological role of the sigma 37 RNA polymerase is to transcribe a class of genes that are catabolite repressed, that encode extracellular enzymes, or that are expressed only during the stationary phase of growth.    HA20, a mutant of Bacillus subtilis phage SPO1, is deficient in both DNA replication and late transcription. HA20 contains mutations in two different genes, which suggested that the two effects might be caused independently. However, single-mutation derivatives, affected only in gene 27, were deficient for both activities. Thus, a single mutation apparently affects both DNA replication and late transcription.    Hybrid plasmids were constructed in which the transcription of regions of inserted DNA was defined. Cells containing these plasmids were transformed with monomeric forms of a different hybrid plasmid, which contained, however, the same inserted DNA as the resident plasmid. The transformation frequencies observed indicated that transcription of homologous DNA in resident plasmids and also tertiary DNA structure interfered with transformation.    The synthesis of exocellular proteinase decreases with increasing concentration of amino acids in the growth medium. After removal of amino acids the enzyme synthesis is gradually restored to normal values. The presence of inhibitors of transcription (actinomycin D) or translation (chloramphenicol) blocks the restoration of enzyme synthesis. No active or inactive precursors of the exocellular enzyme could be detected in the cell. It is likely that the enzyme synthesis is regulated by amino acids at the level of specific mRNA synthesis rather than at the translation level or at the level of secretion. The activity of the enzyme that has already been secreted to the external medium is partially inhibited by amino acids. The periplasmic proteinase is repressed by amino acids to the same extent as the exocellular enzyme. The content of the enzyme(s) inside the protoplast is also decreased during growth in the presence of amino acids.    The Escherichia coli lac operator has been placed on the 3&apos; side of the promoter for the penicillinase gene of Bacillus licheniformis, creating a hybrid promoter controllable by the E. coli lac repressor. The E. coli lac repressor gene has been placed under the control of a promoter and ribosome-binding site that allows expression in Bacillus subtilis. When the penicillinase gene that contains the lac operator is expressed in B. subtilis on a plasmid that also produces the lac repressor, the expression of the penicillinase gene can be modulated by isopropyl beta-D-thiogalactoside (IPTG), an inducer of the lac operon in E. coli. A similar system was constructed from a promoter of the B. subtilis phage SPO-1 and the leukocyte interferon A gene, which allowed the controlled expression of interferon in B. subtilis. These two examples show that a functional control system can be introduced into B. subtilis from E. coli.    The expression of the E. coli hisG gene in B. subtilis cells does not occur in spite of the faithful replication of the relevant DNA fragment cloned in this host by means of a plasmid vector, pHV14 , capable of replication in both B. subtilis and E. coli. Analysis of the RNA transcribed in vitro and in vivo by the B. subtilis RNA polymerase on the cloned hisG sequence indicates that in B. subtilis cells the physiological his operon promoter is not recognized. Transcription is initiated at many sites, some of which are located upstream of and some are located downstream of the his operon promoter. These &quot;adventitious&quot; promoters give rise to convergent transcription products which stop at, or in the vicinity of, the his operon attenuator sequence.    Following shotgun cloning of EcoRI fragments of Bacillus subtilis DNA in pBR322, a hybrid plasmid pUL710 was isolated which complements argC but no other auxotrophs of E. coli K12. Restriction mapping, Southern blotting and other evidence suggest that pUL710 carries an insert of 1.6 kbp, and derives, by deletion of both vector and insert sequences, from a larger but unstable initial hybrid which carried a 12 kbp EcoRI fragment from the B. subtilis chromosome. RecE-dependent integration of pUL710 into the B. subtilis chromosome demonstrated homology between the insert DNA and the argO locus of B. subtilis. pUL710 was found to confer appreciable tetracycline resistance even though the deletion presumed to stabilise the hybrid had inactivated the tet promoter. The results of analysis by Tn5 mutagenesis, transcriptional fusions and run-off in vitro transcription suggest that both the cloned argC gene and the tetracycline gene in pUL710 are expressed from a B. subtilis promoter located very close to the EcoRI cloning site.    The subtilisin gene from B. amyloliquefaciens has been cloned and expressed under its own promoter on a high copy plasmid, pBS42, in Bacillus subtilis I-168 (Marburg strain). Greater than 95 percent of the expressed protease activity is secreted, and the activity is sensitive to inhibition by phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride as expected for subtilisin. Bacillus subtilis transformants carrying the Bacillus amyloliquefaciens subtilisin gene in pBS42 (called pS4) secreted large amounts of a protein not seen in control pBS42 transformants. This protein migrated in SDS gels near the position of authentic subtilisin. The complete nucleotide sequence of the cloned gene has been determined using dideoxy sequencing methods. Ba131 exonuclease digestion studies at the 5&apos; end of the gene have defined a 31 base pair stretch necessary for efficient expression of subtilisin. In addition to this putative promoter region, sequences have been assigned for ribosome binding, translation initiation, a signal peptide, the mature enzyme, and translation and transcription termination. A most interesting feature of the gene is a sequence of unknown function coding for roughly 75 amino acids between the signal sequence and the mature enzyme. It is proposed that this region serve as a pro-peptide as is commonly found in eukaryotic secreted proteases.    A 2.5 X 10(3) base-pair segment of Bacillus sphaericus R DNA cloned in Escherichia coli has previously been shown to carry the functional BspRI modification methylase gene. The approximate location of the gene on this DNA segment and its direction of transcription were established by subcloning experiments. The nucleotide sequence of the relevant region was determined by the Maxam-Gilbert procedure. An open reading frame that can code for a 424 amino acid protein was found. The calculated molecular weight (48,264) of this protein is in fair agreement with previous estimates (50,000 to 52,000). The synthesis of this protein was demonstrated in E. coli minicells. The initiation point of transcription by E. coli RNA polymerase was localized by in vitro transcription experiments. The open reading frame starts 29 base-pairs downstream from the transcription initiation site and it is preceded by a sequence showing extensive Shine-Dalgarno complementarity. Subcloning experiments and translation in minicells suggest that after removal of this translational initiation site, a secondary start site 29 amino acids downstream can also start translation in E. coli, and this shorter protein retains the methylase activity. The overall base composition of the gene and the codon usage indicate a strong preference for A.T base-pairs.    A mutation in any one of eight spoO genes of Bacillus subtilis blocks the process of spore formation at its earliest stage. To investigate how the products of the spoO genes may be involved in developmental gene expression, we fused the lacZ gene of E. coli to spoVG, a sporulation gene whose induction at the onset of sporulation is under spoO control. In cells of Spo+ bacteria containing a single copy of the gene fusion, conditions leading to the onset of sporulation resulted in the induction of beta-galactosidase synthesis. This induction was moderately to severely impaired by mutations in any of seven spoO genes. Deletion and hybridization analysis demonstrated that this sporulation-induced enzyme synthesis was exclusively expressed from the two overlapping promoters, which comprise the spoVG transcription-initiation region, and that a small DNA segment (157 bp) containing the spoVG promoters was sufficient to cause spoO-dependent induction of the fused lacZ gene.    Bacteriophage SPO1 gene 27, whose product is required for late gene transcription and DNA replication, has been cloned in Escherichia coli, and its complete nucleotide sequence has been determined. We infer that the product of gene 27 is a highly basic 17,518-dalton protein of 155 amino acids. The gene for this regulatory protein is transcribed from two promoters: an early promoter situated before the adjacent upstream gene 28 and a middle promoter located between genes 28 and 27.    Sigma-28 RNA polymerase is a minor form of Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase that is highly specific for transcription from a small number of promoter sites in the B. subtilis genome. We have followed transcription from two of these loci (P28-1 and P28-2) in vivo using a quantitative S1 nuclease mapping procedure. Both promoters are used at a modest rate in vegetatively growing cells (about 10 RNA copies per cell) and transcripts are initiated at the same start sites as found in vitro with the purified sigma 28-RNA polymerase. Transcription from the sigma 28 promoters varies somewhat with growth conditions and is shut off rapidly and almost completely after the first hour of sporulation. Neither sigma 28 transcripts is detected in vegetative cells of certain B. subtilis mutants (spoO classes A, B, E, and F) that are defective in sporulation. Transcription from these promoters is restored in second site revertants that are able to sporulate. Hence the action of sigma 28-RNA polymerase appears to be regulated by the spoO genes and the functions controlled by sigma 28-promoters may be closely tied to the system involved in the initiation of sporulation.    A cloned Bacillus pumilus cat gene expresses chloramphenicol-inducible chloramphenicol acetyltransferase activity in Bacillus subtilis. The chloramphenicol inducibility trait was shown to be determined by a 234-bp region of the cloned DNA. Nucleotide sequence analysis of this 234-bp segment indicated that the cat ribosome-binding site occurs within a 40-bp region containing 14-bp terminal inverted repeat sequences. Transcription of this region into RNA should sequester the cat ribosome-binding site in a stable stem-loop conformation. Chloramphenicol-mediated destabilization of the stem-loop is suggested as the basis for the chloramphenicol inducibility phenotype.    Structure and organization of two complete ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene sets, rrnO and rrnA, were determined for the first time in Bacillus subtilis. They are located at the region of the replication origin of the chromosome. Each set constitutes a single operon of: two tandem promoters - leader sequence - 16S rRNA gene - Ile-tRNA gene - Ala-tRNA gene - 23S rRNA gene - 5S rRNA gene - termination signal. The first promoter (P1) of rrnO differs from that of rrnA in sequence and function. P1 of rrnO was used very little for transcription either in vivo or in vitro while P1 was predominantly used in rrnA. A putative transcript of the entire operon was determined and constructed into a secondary structure. Analysis of in vivo transcripts by S1 mapping revealed primary processing sites at the loop and stem structure of 16S rRNA in rrnO and rrnA. A unique sequence in the leader region of rrnO can be formed into a highly complexed secondary structure and affects processing of mature 16S rRNA. The sequences of the two spacer tRNA genes are highly conserved between B. subtilis and Escherichia coli.    Bacillus brevis 47 was found to release approx. 10% of the total cellular lipids into the medium, and the protein secretion process in B. brevis 47 was studied to determine whether any relationship exists with lipid synthesis or alteration in the lipid composition. B. brevis 47 contained the usual phospholipids such as phosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidylglycerol and cardiolipin as well as diglycerides as major neutral lipids. The extracellular lipid consisted of the same constituents as the cellular lipid but with a significantly altered composition. Divalent cations such as Ca2+, which specifically inhibit protein secretion, had no effect on the lipid release. A nonprotein-secreting mutant released lipid to the same extent as wild-type cells. Based on these results, we conclude that protein secretion occurs independently of lipid release.    The effect of DNA structural features on RNA synthesis was investigated. Purified Bacillus subtilis nucleoids templated from vegetative cells were transcribed by the homologous RNA polymerase using Hg-UTP as one of the nucleotide substrates. Low RNA polymerase/DNA ratios were used during transcription in order to avoid nonspecific initiations. The rate of synthesis of total RNA was 40% greater on nucleoid templates than on naked DNA. The proportion of asymmetric transcript synthesized on nucleoid templates (HvsL strand transcripts) was close to that observed in vivo, whereas with naked DNA this value was at least 3-times lower. The percentage of rRNA relative to the total RNA, synthesized in the in vitro system with the nucleoid template, approaches the rate of the in vivo transcription. The size of the RNA synthesized on nucleoids was large and heterogeneous while with naked DNA it was homogeneous and of about 6 S. Our results suggest that the supercoiled, folded nucleoids may retain some of the structural features responsible for the regulation of RNA synthesis in vivo.    The DNA sequence of a cluster of twenty-one tRNA genes distal to a rRNA gene set in B. subtilis was determined. None of the tRNA genes are repeated in the sequence. The only classes of tRNAs that are not represented are those for cysteine, glutamine, tryptophan, and tyrosine. Three of the tRNA genes in this cluster do not have the 3&apos;-CCA sequence encoded in the gene. There is no RNA polymerase terminator sequence in the region between the 5S gene and the first tRNA gene or within the tRNA gene cluster. A terminator sequence was found directly after the last tRNA gene. This rRNA and tRNA gene cluster probably represents one transcriptional unit. However, there may be an RNA polymerase promoter site within this sequence, which raises some interesting questions concerning the regulation of transcription for these tRNA genes.    SpoVG is a developmentally regulated gene from the spore-forming bacterium Bacillus subtilis. The transcription initiation region for spoVG consists of two overlapping promoters whose startpoints of RNA synthesis are ten base pairs apart (Moran et al., 1981a). These startpoints are separately utilized by two forms of RNA polymerase holoenzyme containing different species of B. subtilis sigma factor. We have constructed a series of deletion mutations that extend into the spoVG promoter region from the downstream and from the upstream directions. Transcription studies with these mutated promoters showed that the functional boundaries of the spoVG promoters extended from the region of the transcription startpoints into an upstream A + T-rich box, which was located 76 to 51 base pairs preceding the downstream startsite. We have unexpectedly discovered that propagation of the spoVG promoter region on a high copy number plasmid in B. subtilis interferes with the process of sporulation by impairing development at an early stage. This was not a general effect of promoter amplification, since the propagation on plasmids of two other strong Bacillus promoters had little or no effect on spore formation. Deletion analysis established that the region of spoVG causing sporulation inhibition closely correlated with DNA sequences required for efficient promoter utilization in vitro. We propose that amplification of spoVG titrates a sporulation-specific regulatory protein that binds at or near the region of transcription initiation.    At least four sigma factors separately bind the Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase core (beta beta&apos; alpha 2), each conferring a different promoter specificity on the holoenzyme in vitro. Using the Broome-Gilbert immunological screening, we isolated recombinant lambda phages that carry rpoD, the gene for the most abundant sigma factor, sigma 55. These phages encode a 55,000-dalton protein whose size, immunological properties, and peptide map identify it as sigma 55. All the phages have in common two adjacent 3.5-kilobase EcoRI fragments from the B. subtilis chromosome; most carry additional genomic DNA. Deletion analysis localized rpoD to a 1.6-kilobase region, suggested the direction of its transcription, and found two additional genes near rpoD, which code for proteins of 62,000 and 17,000 daltons.    We have determined the nucleotide sequences of four termination sites recognized by Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase. These sites are located in the terminally repeated segment of the bacteriophage SP01 genome, where most early phage transcription occurs. The SP01 terminators have structures that are similar to those recognized by Escherichia coli RNA polymerase, containing a region of dyad symmetry followed by a stretch of HMU residues in the noncoding DNA strand (HMU is substituted for T in SP01 DNA). We note that in a terminator that is only 60% efficient in vitro, there is a greater distance between these two conserved elements that exists in more efficient terminators. We also find that RNA polymerase molecules which elongate a transcript through a partial terminator often pause at this site.    We have determined the conditions required for in vitro transcription of the cloned chromosomal crystal gene from Bacillus thuringiensis using either the homologous vegetative RNA polymerase or a sporulation specific form of this enzyme. The gene is actively transcribed by the latter enzyme (form II) but not by the vegetative one. Evidence for a specific recognition between the form II enzyme and the promotor site of the crystal gene was obtained by binding experiments. They showed that the binding is increased by the presence of some additional factors, which change the specificity of the vegetative core-enzyme. The sequence of the promoter has been determined and the start-point of the transcription deduced. Two hexanucleotide sequences, TACAAT and CCTACG, centered at - 10 and - 35 bp are present, but are somewhat different from the consensus sequences previously described in other bacilli.    A crude P-100 fraction prepared from Bacillus subtilis 21 min after infection with wild-type phage phi 29 supported the in vitro synthesis of late phi 29 RNA by added RNA polymerase. Synthesis of late RNA was also detected when purified phi 29 DNA was transcribed by RNA polymerase in the presence of an S-150 fraction obtained by lysis of phi 29-infected cells in the presence of 1 M NaCl. Late phi 29 RNA was not synthesized when either the P-100 or the S-150 fraction was prepared from cultures infected with phi 29 having a mutation in gene 4.    The structural gene for C protein, a low molecular weight spore-specific protein from Bacillus megaterium, has been cloned in Escherichia coli. Expression of the C-protein gene in E. coli requires an external transcription promoter and prevention of termination of transcription prior to transcription of all or part of the sequence coding for the C protein. The gene for the C protein is within a 5-kilobase DNA fragment, but this fragment does not code for either of the other two major low molecular weight spore proteins, suggesting that the structural genes for these proteins are not tightly linked.    Clones carring Bacillus subtilis tRNA genes were isolated from a lambda 816 library. A recombinant phage lambda 816-BS83 which was hybridized effectively with unfractionated tRNA probes contained a 3-kb fragment. By a Southern&apos;s blot analysis, it was found that tRNA genes were located in Eco RI-Hinc II region of this fragment. Sequence determination revealed the presence of a cluster of four tRNA genes in this region. The gene organization was as follows: tDNALys-9bp-tDNAGlu-81bp-tDNAAsp-30bp-tDNAPhe. The RNA sequences expected from tDNALys and tDNAPhe were identical with the reported RNA sequences. Two tRNA genes, tDNALys and tDNAAsp encoded the CCA sequence of 3&apos;-terminal region, but the other two, tDNAGlu and tDNAPhe did not. A promoter-like sequence which corresponds to the sigma 55-recognition site was found in a region about 100bp upstream from tDNALys.    Ribosomal mutants of Bacillus subtilis IG2 and IG7 resistant to 100 mkg/ml of streptomycin have been isolated. The strA80 and strA88 mutations reduce the level of sporulation as well as antibiotic and proteolytic activity of bacteria. RNA polymerase mutations rfm20 and rfm146 transferred by transformation into ribosomal mutants suppress strA80 and strA88 mutations. As a result, sporulation was restored. Both mutations were cotransformed with cysA gene and mapped within the cluster of ribosomal and RNA polymerase genes. It is proposed that the ribosomal strA80 and strA88 mutations influence transcription of gene (s) which regulate initiation of sporulation and that the RNA polymerase rfm20 and rfm146 mutations can restore sporulation. The results suggest that ribosomes are most likely to be not able to play a specific role in sporulation and secondary metabolism of Bac. subtilis.    Bacillus subtilis was transformed with a hybrid gene in which the sequence encoding the alpha-amylase signal peptide was joined by a linker to the sequence encoding mature human interferon alpha 2(IFN-alpha 2). The hybrid preprotein was cleaved precisely following the last amino acid of the alpha-amylase signal sequence and was secreted at 0.5--1 mg per liter. IFN-alpha 2, preceded by either one or six amino acids, has the same specific antiviral activity as IFN-alpha 2 itself.    The barrier to the Escherichia coli gene expression in bacillar cells is caused both by differences in DNA regulatory elements involved in the interaction with RNA polymerase and ribosomes, and by the structure and function features of the very enzymes which carry out this interaction.    A developmentally regulated gene (spoVG) from the spore-forming bacterium Bacillus subtilis is expressed from two overlapping promoters, which direct transcription initiating from sites separated by 10 base pairs. Utilization of the upstream promoter is determined by an RNA polymerase sigma factor of molecular weight 37,000 (sigma 37). We report the isolation of a 32,000-molecular weight species of sigma factor (sigma 32), which exclusively dictates transcription initiation from the downstream promoter, and suggest a model for the way in which sigma-specific recognition sequences are intermeshed within the spoVG transcription initiation region.    pPL608-TR1 is a high-copy plasmid that permits phenotypic expression of the mouse dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) gene in Bacillus subtilis. A plasmid mutation has been identified that increases expression of mouse DHFR more than ten-fold. The mutation is located in a 0.2-kb segment that intervenes between the DHFR gene and the 0.3-kb promoter fragment needed for transcriptional activation of DHFR. Nucleotide sequence analysis suggests that the effect of the mutation is to facilitate translation, initiated within the promoter fragment, through the 0.2-kb segment to the site of insertion of the DHFR-containing fragment. Additional promoter-containing fragments selected by their ability to promote expression of a plasmid gene located downstream from DHFR, the CAT gene, promote either high, intermediate or no phenotypic expression of DHFR. The results indicate that promoter fragments that allow phenotypic expression of the mouse DHFR gene contain two regulatory signals. One signal is essential to transcription of both DHFR and CAT and therefore functions as a promoter. The second signal may be necessary for translation of that portion of the mRNA specifying mouse DHFR.    To study the requirements for the in vitro formation of the protein p3-dAMP complex, the first step in phi29 DNA replication, extracts from B. subtilis infected with phi29 mutants in genes 2, 3, 5, 6 and 17, involved in DNA synthesis, have been used. The formation of the initiation complex is completely dependent on the presence of a functional gene 2 product, in addition to protein p3 and phi29 DNA-protein p3 as template. ATP is also required, although it can be replaced by other nucleotides. The products of genes 5, 6 and 17 do not seem to be needed in the formation of the initiation complex. Inhibitors of the host DNA polymerase III, DNA gyrase or RNA polymerase had no effect on the formation of the protein p3-dAMP complex, suggesting that these proteins are not involved in the initiation of phi29 DNA replication. ddATP or aphidicolin, inhibitors of DNA chain elongation, had also no effect on the formation of the initiation complex.    Gene 28 of Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage SPO1 codes for a regulatory protein, a sigma factor known as sigma gp28, that binds to the bacterial core RNA polymerase to direct the recognition of phage middle gene promoters. middle promoters exhibit distinctive and conserved nucleotide sequences in two regions centered about 10 and 35 base pairs upstream from the start point of mRNA synthesis. Here we report the cloning of gene 28 and its complete nucleotide sequence. We infer that sigma gp28 is a 25,707-dalton protein of 220 amino acids. Neither the nucleotide sequence of gene 28 nor the inferred amino acid sequence of sigma gp28 exhibits extensive homology to the gene or protein sequence of Escherichia coli sigma factor.    The nucleotide sequence of the promoter region and part of the coding region of the crystal protein gene from Bacillus thuringiensis var. kurstaki HD-1-Dipel has been determined by analysis of a recombinant plasmid from Escherichia coli. The start points for transcription of the gene in B. thuringiensis and in the E. coli strain carrying the recombinant plasmid were located by S1 nuclease mapping. Two adjacent start sites were identified using RNAs synthesized during sporulation of B. thuringiensis: transcription was initiated from one site early in sporulation and from the other site in the middle of sporulation. A good correlation was found between the appearance of the crystal protein gene-specific RNA and the production of the protein, indicating that the gene is primarily under transcriptional control during sporulation. Parallel studies with the recombinant strain of E. coli revealed the presence of only a single species of gene-specific RNA, regardless of the growth phase of the cells; the crystal protein was produced at all stages of growth. The sequence for eight amino acids at the NH2 terminus of the crystal protein was determined and the corresponding coding sequence was located in the DNA sequence. A potential ribosome binding site of 11 nucleotides was found, located three nucleotides upstream from the initiator ATG codon. The deduced sequence for the first 333 amino acids of the crystal protein is presented.    We have determined the sequence of a 1,162-base-pair DNA fragment containing a spo0F gene which is required for an early stage of sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. The sequence has only one long open reading frame consisting of 173 codons, which has been confirmed to be the spo0F cistron by DNA-mediated transformation and in vitro transcription. In UV-irradiated &quot;maxicells&quot; containing pUBSF13, the plasmid that carries cloned spo0F gene, we have observed the synthesis of a 20-kilodalton polypeptide that is absent from cells carrying a vector plasmid pUB110. The molecular weight of this protein is in agreement with the calculated molecular weight of the spo0F gene product (Mr, 19,065). The putative promoter sequences of spo0F gene were 5&apos; T-A-T-A-A-T 3&apos; at -10 and 5&apos; T-T-G-A-T-T 3&apos; at -35. An octamer sequence, 5&apos; A-A-A-G-G-A-G-G 3&apos;, situated 8 base pairs prior to the initiation codon was found to be perfectly complementary with the 3&apos; end of 16S ribosomal RNA. This result offers additional evidence for the proposal by Rabinowitz&apos;s group that an extensive mRNA-rRNA interaction is a requirement for efficient translation by B. subtilis ribosomes.    We purified Q beta replicase containing EF-Ts from Bacillus stearothermophilus in place of the homologous polypeptide from Escherichia coli. The hybrid enzyme was fully active in the transcription of a variety of templates. It was found to be qualitatively similar to native Q beta replicase with respect to a variety of parameters which measure the efficiency of initiation of RNA synthesis. The results demonstrated that Q beta replicase can tolerate substantial alterations in the EF-Tu X Ts component of the enzyme. These alterations resulted in only minor perturbations of catalytic properties.    Glucose dehydrogenase of Bacillus subtilis is a developmental enzyme that is not found in growing (vegetative) cells but is synthesized after the differentiation process that leads to the production of endospores has started. We have isolated the gene coding for this enzyme from a lambda Charon 4A phage library of B. subtilis DNA. It is transcribed and translated in vegetative cells of the nondifferentiating organism Escherichia coli into enzymatically active glucose dehydrogenase that has the same physicochemical properties as the enzyme produced in B. subtilis during sporulation. Subcloning of the lambda DNA insert into pBR322 plasmid derivatives showed that the glucose dehydrogenase gene was transcribed in E. coli from a promoter within the B. subtilis genome.    The gene coding for amylase (EC.3.2.1.1) has been isolated and sequenced from Bacillus subtilis by cloning in lambda Charon4A and pBR322. The entire coding sequence and large preceding and following regions, comprising the presumed transcriptional and translational regulatory regions, were sequenced. The coding sequence shows a large open reading frame with a translated molecular weight of 72,800 and a presumed signal sequence of approximately thirty-two amino acids. When the intact gene is present in Escherichia coli, it confers the ability to degrade starch, indicating that the gene is expressed in a functional state.    We have isolated by molecular cloning the gene coding for the alpha-amylase (1,4-alpha-D-glucan glucanohydrolase, EC 3.2.1.1.) from Bacillus amyloliquefaciens and determined its complete nucleotide sequence. The gene cloned in the plasmid pUB110 using Bacillus subtilis as a host, was contained in a 2.3-kilobase insert. Starting from an ATG initiator codon, an open reading frame comprising a total of 514 amino acids (1542 base pairs) was found within the cloned DNA fragment. The gene region encoding the COOH terminus of alpha-amylase was located by direct COOH-terminal analysis of the purified exoenzyme. The NH2-terminal portion of the gene encodes a 31 amino acid-long signal peptide (Palva, L., Pettersson, R. F., Kalkkinen, N., Lehtovaara, P., Sarvas, M., Soderlund, H., Takkinen, K., and Kaariainen, L. (1981) Gene 15, 43-51). Since the signal peptide is correctly cleaved in the new host, as shown here by direct NH2-terminal sequence analysis, the exoamylase consists of 483 amino acid residues, corresponding to a molecular weight of 54,778. The reading frame used to deduce the amino acid sequence was found to be correct by comparison with partial amino acid sequence data published previously (Detera, S. D., and Friedberg, F. (1979) Int. J. Peptide Protein Res. 14, 364-372; Chung, H., and Friedberg, F. (1980) Biochem. J. 185, 387-395). Several differences between the sequence presented here and the partial ones published previously, however, were found. The nucleotide sequences both 5&apos; and 3&apos; to the alpha-amylase gene revealed palindromic structures including a stretch of six T-residues, suggesting transcription termination signals on both sides of the gene. Thus, it appears that alpha-amylase is translated from a monocistronic mRNA.    In a qualitative way, the materials and methods available to the recombinant DNA genetic engineer for overproducing proteins have been explained. The status of technology development for overproduction using E. coli, B. subtilis, and yeast as host microorganisms has been briefly assessed. Potential and actual genetic engineering solutions to the plasmid-shedding problem have been outlined. Since plasmid shedding presents a serious problem to the fermentation engineer responsible for scale-up to commercial production levels and since the ways around this problem appear mostly to have their solutions in the realm of genetic engineering coupled with appropriate fermentation protocol, the genetic engineer should work closely with the fermentation engineer to make scale-up realizable. Neither the genetic engineer nor the fermentation engineer can afford to be ignorant of the tools available to each profession if fermentation scale-up of genetically engineered microorganisms is to be accomplished economically.    Two HindIII generated DNA fragments of 3.0 and 2.3 Kb derived from rRNA genes of B. subtilis were cloned in E. coli with pBR322. The 3.0 Kb fragment could be subcloned in B. subtilis using pC194. However, only the multimeric, but not the monomeric derivatives of this hybrid plasmid were active in transformation of B. subtilis cells. The 2.3 Kb fragment could neither be subcloned in pC194 nor in pPL603, using both cell and protoplast transformation. We attribute the nonclonability of the 2.3 Kb fragment in B. subtilis to the presence of strong promoter activity in this fragment. Direct proof for the presence of a strong promoter, which is apparently responsible for the transcription of the rRNA gene, was obtained in experiments with B. subtilis and E. coli promoter search plasmids.    Bifunctional recombinant plasmids were constructed, comprised of the E. coli vectors pBR322, pBR325 and pACYC184 and different plasmids from Gram-positive bacteria, e.g. pBSU161-1 of B. subtilis and pUB110 and pC221 of S. aureus. The beta-lactamase (bla) gene and the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (cat) gene from the E. coli plasmids were not transcribed and therefore not expressed in B. subtilis. However, tetracycline resistance from the E. coli plasmids was expressed in B. subtilis. Transcription of the tetracycline resistance gene(s) started in B. subtilis at or near the original E. coli promoter, the sequence of which is almost identical with the sequence recognized by sigma 55 of B. subtilis RNA polymerase.    A 1,250 base pair Bacillus subtilis chromosomal HindIII restriction fragment (S fragment) has been cloned into the B. subtilis expression-probe plasmid pGR71. The S fragment induces the expression of the pGR71 chloramphenicol resistance gene shortly after the initiation of sporulation. The transcriptional promoter responsible for the expression of this temporally regulated genetic element has been identified and mapped in vitro. This promoter is recognized exclusively by the minor B. subtilis RNA polymerase that contains the 37,000 dalton sigma factor.    A phi 29 DNA fragment containing gene 3, coding for the 5&apos;-terminal protein, and several other early genes has been cloned in a pBR322 derivative plasmid (pKC30) under the control of the pL promoter of bacteriophage lambda. Four polypeptides of Mr 27000, 18500, 17500 and 12500 were labelled with [35S]methionine after heat induction, accounting for about 15% of the de novo synthesized protein. The Mr 27000 and 12500 proteins were characterized as p3, the 5&apos;-terminal protein, and p4, involved in the control of late transcription, respectively. Protein p3 synthesized in Escherichia coli was active in the in vitro formation of the initiation complex p3-dAMP when supplemented with extracts from Bacillus subtilis infected with a sus3 mutant.    Expression of the SPR methyltransferase gene from B. subtilis phage SPR cloned into lambda and SPP1 was studied by analyzing the sensitivity of the hybrid phage DNAs to restriction by the enzymes HaeIII, MspI, and HpaII. The following results were obtained: (1) The genes were expressed both in the homologous (B. subtilis) and heterologous (E. coli) host. (2) The specificity of the expression of the cloned gene was identical to that of the gene in SPR. (3) Expression depended on the orientation of the cloned segment within the vector DNAs suggesting that vector promoters were involved in transcription. The coding strand of the cloned DNA was identified through hybridization with SPR mRNA.    The molecular basis for lack of phenotypic expression of one chromosome in Bacillus subtilis non-complementing diploid clones (Ncd cells) was investigated. Correlations between chromosomal inactivation and absence of functional transcripts were determined with wild-type prophage phi 105 or a thermoinducible mutant phi 105 cts23, on either the expressed or the silent chromosome. It appears that no significant amount of phage mRNA is detectable in Ncd cells carrying the prophage in the inactive chromosome. However, phi 105 mRNA represents 0.23% of total cellular mRNA in an Ncd strain with the prophage in the expressed chromosome and 0.28% in the parental lysogenic strain. The lack of an mRNA repressor of phi 105 prophage from the silent chromosome was confirmed by the absence of repressor activity in Ncd clones with a temperature sensitive mutant phi 105 located in the silent chromosome. After heat induction, no phage production was observed. As expected these clones do not exhibit phi 105 immunity when superinfected with the same phage. The combined data of the present and previous work suggest that control of phenotypic suppression of Ncd strains should, at the transcription level, involve a different DNA tertiary organisation in one of the two chromosomes.    Under conditions of severe nitrogen starvation, brought about by nutritional shift-down, Bacillus brevis ATCC 8185 was unable to sporulate unless supplemented with the peptide antibiotic tyrocidine. The induction of sporulation was highly specific for tyrocidine and required only very low concentrations of the peptide (5 microM). Tyrocidine-induced sporulation was accompanied by the typical sporulation-specific events (e.g. extracellular protease production and dipicolinate synthesis) as well as the formation of linear gramicidin. The addition of tyrocidine produced acute inhibition of RNA synthesis that was followed by a limited activation of transcription near the time of onset of linear gramicidin synthesis, when the first sporulation-specific changes were observed. These results provide direct evidence for a role of tyrocidine in sporulation of B. brevis and suggest that the action of the peptide antibiotic may involve the control of transcription. Such a notion is supported by earlier studies on the effects of tyrocidine and linear gramicidin on purified RNA polymerase.    Sesquiterpene lactones, produced in light and capable of inhibiting auxin-induced elongation growth of coleoptile and hypocotyl segments, were isolated from young leaves of Helianthus annuus (Spring and Hager, Planta in press, 1982). These compounds have an antibiotic effect on gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria as well as on some fungi. The minimal inhibiting concentration (MIC) of compound II (15-hydroxy-3-dehydrodesoxyfruticin, Fig. 1), for example, is 15 micrograms/ml for Bacillus brevis, and 95 micrograms/ml for the fungus Eremothecium ashbyi. In addition, cytotoxic effects on mouse myeloma cells (NS-1) were also shown. Compound II causes a 50% inhibition of cell proliferation (ED50) at a concentration of 170 nM, compound I (niveusin C, Fig. 1) at 220 nM. The LD50-values were 0.15 micrograms II/ml and 1.24 micrograms I/ml, respectively. By measuring 14C-labelled thymidine, uridine and leucine incorporation into murine cells of the ascitic form of Ehrlich carcinoma (EAC) it could be shown that compounds I and II inhibit DNA and RNA synthesis, but do not affect the translation processes involved in protein synthesis. Furthermore, it could be shown that the exocyclic methylene group in the molecules of I and II plays an important role in triggering the described inhibitory effects.    A fragment of the Bacillus subtilis chromosome containing a gene whose transcription is dependent on sigma-28-containing RNA polymerase has been genetically mapped by means of an integrable plasmid. This gene resides on the chromosome adjacent to the stage 0 sporulation locus spo0E between metC and citL. The gene was insertionally inactivated by cloning an internal EcoRI-HindIII fragment in the integrable plasmid pJH101 and by inserting the plasmid into the chromosome by transformation. Transformants bearing an inactivated gene were indifferent to this inactivation for both growth and sporulation.    The cyclopeptide antibiotic gramicidin S or tyrocidine in concentrations of 2 to 4 mumol/mg of membrane protein inhibited the active transport of [3H]alanine and [3H]uridine in membrane vesicles isolated from Bacillus brevis and Bacillus subtilis. We used one analog of gramicidin S and two of tyrocidine A to study the relationship between peptide structure and antibacterial action as seen in inhibiting active transport and in vitro transcription and in delaying spore outgrowth. The data showed that [Ser2,2&apos;]-gramicidin S, in which the two ornithine residues were replaced by two serines, was at least 50 times less active antibacterially and gave a low response in transport inhibition and delay of spore outgrowth compared with the natural peptide. The antibacterial activity of [Val6]-tyrocidine A was twice lower than that of tyrocidine A, and it also showed a considerable reduction in transport and transcription inhibition. [Orn7]-tyrocidine A containing two ornithine residues in positions corresponding to those in gramicidin S was almost inactive in all functions tested. The correlation between peptide structure and activity is discussed.    The nucleotide sequence of an early region of the phi 29 genome has been determined. The sequenced region includes genes 3 and 4, which code for the protein covalently linked to the 5&apos; ends of phi 29 DNA and the protein involved in the control of late transcription, respectively. The position and nature of the mutations of mutants sus3(91) and sus4(56) has also been determined.    The Hind III G fragment from the Bacillus subtilis phage phi 29 DNA, inserted downstream from the bacteriophage lambda promoter PL carried by a pBR322 derivative plasmid (pPLc28), directed the synthesis in E. coli of two proteins of apparent molecular weight 27500 and 12500. With the use of the recombinants obtained with the DNA from mutants sus3(91) and sus4(56), the two proteins were identified as a modified p3 (p3&apos;), the protein covalently linked to the 5&apos; ends of phi 29 DNA, and p4, responsible for the phi 29 late transcription, respectively. Under the best conditions used, proteins p4 and p3&apos; were produced in E. coli from the cloned DNA fragments in an amount corresponding to approximately 30% and 6% of total de novo protein synthesis, respectively.    Peptide maps of four regulatory subunits of Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase were obtained. Three sigma-like proteins (sigma 55, sigma 37, and sigma 29) as well as the transcription modification factor, delta (delta) protein, were shown to give unique peptide patterns. This observation demonstrates that each is a distinct protein species; none is derived from another by a simple proteolytic modification.    The peptide antibiotic tyrocidine which is produced by Bacillus brevis and is probably involved in sporogenesis, unwinds superhelical plasmids in vitro at low peptide: DNA ratios, as found by gel electrophoresis. At higher peptide concentrations, the DNA is packed tightly leading to apparent nuclease stability of the complex and inhibition of RNA synthesis. The addition of the linear gramicidin, another peptide antibiotic synthesized by the same bacterial strain, partially restores transcription by breaking down the tightly packed DNA X peptide complex. The complexed DNA, after nuclease digestion, is retained on a nitrocellulose filter, but loses its affinity for the filter in the presence of gramicidin. The results are discussed with respect to possible functions of the two peptides within in the cell.    We report the promoter structure of the Bacillus licheniformis 749/C penicillinase (penP) gene. The transcript encoding the penicillinase gene was identified by in vitro run-off transcription using both E. coli RNA polymerase and B. subtilis RNA polymerase. Utilization of this promoter in linearized DNA by the B. subtilis RNA polymerase showed extreme sensitivity to ionic strength. The 5&apos; sequence of the penP mRNA was determined using enzymatic sequencing (1). Holoenzymes from E. coli and B. subtilis (E sigma 55) initiate penP RNA synthesis at the same site. Alignment of this RNA sequence with the reported DNA sequence of ther penP gene (2,3) revealed the &quot;-35 region&quot; and &quot;Pribnow box&quot; sequences that are recognized as 5&apos;TTGCAT and 5&apos;AATACT, respectively. Potential secondary structure within the promoter exists which may play a role in the expression of the penicillinase gene. The location of the penP promoter was further confirmed by molecular cloning of a DNA fragment containing the expected promoter sequence into a promoter-fishing vector useful for monitoring promoter activities in both E. coli and B. subtilis.    The first replicating fragment of the Bacillus subtilis chromosome, B7, inhibited the replication of the plasmid that carried this fragment. In earlier work using sequential cleavage by Alu I, the suppressor function was located within a 489-base-pair segment. The nucleotide sequence of the entire segment now has been determined. The sequence is characterized by two promoter-like structures and several putative recognition sequences, such as termination signals, 2-fold symmetries, inverted repeats, and repeats. By means of sequential cleavage with exonuclease BAL-31, the essential region for suppression was located in a 200-base-pair region that contains the two promoters with the same orientation. Specific transcription was produced in vitro by using B. subtilis or Escherichia coli RNA polymerases. The transcription was mostly from the second promoter. Elimination of the -35 region of the second promoter dramatically affected both inhibitory activity and in vitro transcription, suggesting that the transcriptional activity of the second promoter is involved in the cis-inhibition of DNA replication. The significance of the suppressor sequence in the region of the replication origin of the B. subtilis chromosome is discussed.    DNA-dependent RNA polymerase from vegetative cells of the gram-negative, fruiting bacterium Myxococcus xanthus was purified more than 300-fold by a modified Burgess procedure (Lowe et al., Biochemistry 18:1344-1352, 1979), using Polymin P precipitation, 40 to 65% saturated ammonium sulfate fractional precipitation, double-stranded DNA cellulose chromatography, A5m gel filtration chromatography, and single-stranded DNA agarose chromatography. The last step separated the RNA polymerase into a core fraction and an enriched holoenzyme fraction. The core enzyme showed a subunit structure similar to that of the Escherichia coli polymerase, as follows: beta&apos; and beta (145,000 and 140,000 daltons, respectively) and alpha (38,000 daltons). A comparison of the core enzyme and the holoenzyme implicated two polypeptides as possible sigma subunits. These polypeptides were closely related, as indicated by peptide analysis. M. xanthus RNA polymerase was capable of transcribing DNAs from E. coli phages T7, T4, and lambda, Bacillus subtilis phage phi 29, and M. xanthus phages Mx1, Mx4, and Mx8. Transcription of T7 and phi 29 DNAs was stimulated by KCl, whereas transcription of Mx1, Mx4, and Mx8 DNAs was inhibited by KCl. Magnesium ion dependence, rifampin and heparin sensitivities, and spermidine stimulation of M. xanthus RNA polymerase activity were similar to those found with E. coli RNA polymerase. The pH optimum of M. xanthus RNA polymerase activity was more basic than that of E. coli polymerase. M. xanthus RNA polymerase was capable of selective transcription in vitro when DNAs from phages T7 delta 111, phi 29, and Mx1 were used. The molecular weights of the resulting phage RNA transcripts made by M. xanthus RNA polymerase (as determined by agarose-acrylamide slab gel electrophoresis) were the same as the molecular weights of the transcripts synthesized by E. coli RNA polymerase. No discrete transcripts were detected as the in vitro RNA products of M. xanthus phage Mx4 and Mx8 DNA transcription. Southern transcript synthesized by M. xanthus RNA polymerase. Three transcripts (transcripts A, B, and C; molecular weights, 2.55 X 10(6), 1.95 X 10(6), and 1.56 X 10(6), respectively) were identified as in vitro RNA products of M. xanthus phage Mx1 DNA transcription when either E. coli or M. xanthus RNA polymerase was used. A Southern blot hybridization analysis indicated that the E. coli RNA polymerase and the M. xanthus RNA polymerase transcribe common SalI restriction fragments of Mx1 DNA.    Gene activity in the development of phage SPO1 is transcriptionally regulated. Early viral genes are transcribed by the major vegetative cell RNA polymerase (E. sigma). Middle viral genes are transcribed by RNA polymerase core (E) bearing the SPO1 gene 28 protein (gp28) instead of sigma. This paper deals with the competitive interactions of sigma and gp28 with E which must, at least in part, be involved in the ability of viral middle gene expression to succeed early gene expression. An in vitro assay has been developed for determining the proportions of early (E. sigma) and SPO1 middle (E.gp28) Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase in mixtures. The assay, which is based on the transcription of two well studied SPO1 restriction fragments followed by gel electrophoresis and quantitation of the E. sigma and E.gp28 transcription products, has been used to study the interactions of sigma and gp28 with RNA polymerase core. These subunits are found to be capable of competitively excluding each other. The binding competition is sensitive to ionic strength, with sigma being more effective below 0.2 total ionic strength and gp28 being more effective at higher values. The outcome of competition is also dependent on the order of addition of subunits and the reconstitution kinetics have been studied. The subunit competition is rather insensitive, particularly at higher ionic strength, to temperature. Gp28 can convert E. sigma to E.gp28 but the reverse reaction occurs much less efficiently. The B. subtilis delta protein biases the sigma-gp28 competition in favor of the sigma subunit. the implications of these results for the physiological transition of transcriptional specificity during SPO1 development are discussed.    RNA polymerase holoenzyme from Micrococcus luteus synthesizes in vitro a run-off transcript of 85 nucleotides from a DNA fragment containing part of gene E of bacteriophage phi X174. This RNA starts with GTP as the 5&apos; terminus 18 nucleotides downstream from the start of gene E on the viral (+)strand. Transcription does not occur when the fragment is cleaved 36 nucleotides upstream of the initiation site. No transcript is obtained with RNA polymerase core or holoenzyme from Escherichia coli. Other DNA fragments containing the three major E. coli promoters of phi X174 are transcribed by both enzymes although much less efficiently by M. luteus RNA polymerase. When subunit sigma in E. coli RNA polymerase is replaced by sigma from M. luteus the resulting hybrid enzyme actively transcribes the DNA fragment containing the inner region of gene D with formation of the same run-off transcript which is obtained with M. luteus holoenzyme. In the presence of sigma from E. coli this RNA is not synthesized. The hybrid enzyme also transcribes a DNA fragment containing the gene A promoter of phi X174 with even higher efficiency than RNA polymerase holoenzyme from E. coli.    There are six classes of SPO1 transcripts which are, at least partially, regulated independently of each other. Analysis of proteins made in infections by phage mutants defective in DNA synthesis, or in genes which positively control transcription, permitted each protein to be assigned to one transcription class. Most of the late proteins belong to transcription class m2l. There seem to be few, if any, phage proteins in the l class whose mRNA synthesis depends absolutely on phage DNA synthesis, UV irradiation of host cells allowed the detection of many additional early proteins. The early proteins detected in vivo were compared with proteins synthesized in vitro, using bacterial or gp28 phage-modified RNA polymerase in an Escherichia coli cell-free system. Proteins characterized in vivo as belonging to the e transcription class could be made efficiently in vitro only when transcription was performed by bacterial RNA polymerase. em proteins could be elicited through the use of either bacterial or gp28 polymerase, indicating that their genes can be transcribed in either the early or the middle mode.    The primary sequence was established for two lysine tRNA isoacceptors which differ in abundance during development in Bacillus subtilis. Both tRNAs shared the same primary sequence but differed in the degree of post-transcriptional modification in the anticodon loop. The earlier eluting species, tRNA lys 1, had an unmodified C in position 32 and a mixture of N-[9-beta-ribofuranosyl) purin-6-ylcarbamoyl]-L-threonine, t6A, and N-[(9-beta-D-ribofuranosyl-2-methylthio-purin-6-yl)carbamoyl]threonine, ms2t6A, in position 37. The later eluting species, tRNA Lys 3, which is the more efficient in protein synthesis, had a modified C in position 32 and only ms2t6A in position 37. The possibility exists that modification to make a more efficient tRNA species may be part of a functional interaction between the translational and transcriptional changes that are part of the differentiation process in B. subtilis.    RNA polymerase was purified from five species of Bacillus, including Bacillus subtilis. Each polymerase had a subunit composition analogous to that reported for B. subtilis, i.e., beta beta &apos;2 alpha sigma delta omega 1 omega 2. The delta subunits from the B. subtilis and Bacillus thuringiensis polymerases were interchangeable, as judged from their effects on promoter selection in the polymerase binding assay.    The nucleotide sequence of the left end of bacteriophage phi 29 DNA has been determined. Together with data reported earlier (Yoshikawa et al., 1981), this sequencing comprises the major early genetic region of this viral genome (5708 bp). Computer analysis of the DNA sequences revealed that there are up to fifteen open reading frames which could encode polypeptides containing more than thirty amino acids. The DNA sequence also revealed a number of potential regulatory signals, promoters and ribosome binding sites. The initiation and the termination of transcription and probable early gene products are discussed.    The SP01 mutant sus HA20 (gene 27) was found to be defective for synthesis of viral late RNA. It is known that gene 27 is also required for viral DNA replication. The SP01 gene 27 product resembles the T4 gene 45 product, which also has a dual role in viral DNA replication and late transcription.    During the outgrowth of Bacillus subtilis spores, there is a period of RNA and protein synthesis in the absence of DNA replication. Two mutants of B. subtilis, PB2442 (gsp-4) and PB2452 (gsp-81), were used to study the pattern of RNA synthesis during this period. The two mutants are temperature-sensitive in the outgrowth phase, and show a limited amount of incorporation of (3H)uridine at 47 degrees C. The RNAs synthesized during a 2 min pulse with (3H)uridine were hybridized to EcoRI-digested DNA, after agarose gel electrophoresis and transfer to nitrocellulose paper (Southern technique). For both mutants the transcripts synthesized at 35 degrees C at different times were different. Differences were also observed in the transcripts made at 47 degrees C. For both mutants, in the presence of chloramphenicol, the same hybridization pattern was obtained for RNAs pulse-labelled at different periods during outgrowth.    Gramicidin, a peptide antibiotic produced by Bacillus brevis, inhibits initiation of transcription by RNA polymerase (nucleosidetriphosphate:RNA nucleotidyltransferase, EC 2.7.7.6). We show here that the presence of gramicidin causes an increase in the rate of cleavage of the sigma subunit of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase by trypsin, although it does not alter the cleavage rate of any of the core subunits. Furthermore, whereas isolated sigma is cleaved much faster than is sigma in holoenzyme, gramicidin substantially decreases the trypsin cleavage rate of isolated sigma. Inhibition of RNA polymerase activity by gramicidin in consistent with a sigma-specific effect: the antibiotic is a strong inhibitor of transcription of T7 phage DNA, which requires sigma for activity, but it has little effect on transcription of sigma-independent templates, such as poly(dA-dT).poly)dA-dT) and calf thymus DNA. These results are discussed in light of the hypothesized role for gramicidin in the initiation of sporulation of B. brevis.    phi 29 DNA directs the synthesis of three major proteins of Mr = 22,400, 13,900, and 10,500 in a cell-free transcription-translation system derived from Bacillus subtilis. We have determined the locations of the coding regions for these early proteins on the phi 29 genome, and our results are in agreement with genetic evidence that the 22.4-kilodalton protein is the product of cistron 17 (p17) and the 13.9-kilodalton protein is the product of cistron 6 (p6). The 13.9-kilodalton and 10.5-kilodalton proteins are encoded on a polycistronic mRNA previously designated G3b RNA. We have determined the nucleotide sequence of a HindIII restriction fragment of phi 29 DNA, the H fragment, that encodes the 13.9-kilodalton protein and contains two early promoters, G3a and G3b. The nucleotide sequence of the ribosome binding site contains a polypurine region capable of forming a very stable complex with nine bases on the 3&apos; end of B. subtilis 16 S rRNA. This strong Shine-Dalgarno complementarity supports the hypothesis that an extensive mRNA . rRNA interaction is a requirement for efficient translation by B. subtilis ribosomes (McLaughlin, J. R., Murray, C. L., and Rabinowitz, J. C. (1981) J. Biol. Chem. 256, 11283-11291). The nucleotide sequences of both promoters are very similar to the &quot;consensus&quot; sequence for Escherichia coli promoters. While E. coli RNA polymerase initiates transcription from both of these promoters in vitro, only the G3b promoter is utilized by B. subtilis RNA polymerase under the same conditions.    ermC is a plasmid gene which specifies resistance to macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin B antibiotics. The product of ermC was previously shown to be an inducible rRNA methylase, which is regulated translationally, and a mechanism for this regulation, termed the translational attenuation model, has been proposed. This model postulates that alternative inactive and active conformational states of the ermC mRNA are modulated by erythromycin-induced ribosome-stalling during translation of a leader peptide. In the present study the translational attenuation model was tested by constructing a series of deletants missing the ermC promoter and portions of the regulatory (leading) region. In these mutants, ermC transcription is dependent on fusion to an upstream promoter. Depending on the terminus of each deletion within the regulatory region, determined by DNA sequencing, ermC expression is observed to be either high level and inducible (like the wild-type), high level and noninducible, or low level and noninducible. The translational attenuation model predicts that as the deletions extend deeper into the leader region, successively masking and unmasking sequences required for translation of the methylase, an alternation of high and low level methylase expression will be observed. These predictions are confirmed. Based on this and other information, the model is refined and extended, and both direct translational activation and kinetic trapping of a metastable active intermediate during transcription are proposed to explain basal synthesis of methylase and to rationalize the effects of certain regulatory mutants.    Nucleoids of non-complementing diploids (Ncd) from protoplast fusion of B. subtilis were isolated. Their purified DNA banded in neutral CsCl gradient as a single unimodal peak of buoyant density 1.711 g/cm3, a value which is similar to that of the DNA purified from the original parental strains, suggesting that methylation of bases is not a significant factor in chromosome inactivation. Nucleoids released from a Ncd clone give two peaks in a sucrose gradient with a characteristic S value for each nucleoid. That is in contrast to nucleoids from the haploid parents whose sedimental patterns show only one peak. Both nucleoid preparations from Ncd strains assayed for transformation activity show the fast sedimenting nucleoid devoid of transformation activity while the slow nucleoid was active in transformation for the alleles carried by the genome which is expressed in vivo. Both nucleoids of the Ncd strains are transcribed in vivo. The RNA associated with the inactive chromosome is synthesized by the RNA polymerase of the active one. This study provides evidence that inactivation of one parental genome in the Ncd strain may be related with the tertiary organization of its DNA.    We have determined the nucleotide sequence of two Bacillus subtilis promoters (veg and tms) that are utilized by the principal form of B. subtilis RNA polymerase found in vegetative cells (sigma 55-RNA polymerase) and have compared our sequences to those of several previously reported Bacillus promoters. Hexanucleotide sequences centered approximately 35 (the &quot;--35&quot; region) and 10 (the &quot;--10&quot; region) base pairs upstream from the veg and tms transcription starting points (and separated by 17 base pairs) corresponded closely to the consensus hexanucleotides (TTGACA and TATAAT) attributed to Escherichia coli promoters. Conformity to the preferred --35 and --10 sequences may not be sufficient to promote efficient utilization by B. subtilis RNA polymerase, however, since three promoters (veg, tms and E. coli tac) that conform to these sequences and that are utilized efficiently by E. coli RNA polymerase were used with highly varied efficiencies by B. subtilis RNA polymerase. We have also analyzed mRNA sequences in DNA located downstream from eight B. subtilis chromosomal and phage promoters for nucleotide sequences that might signal the initiation of translation. In accordance with the rules of McLaughlin, Murray and Rabinowitz (1981), we observe mRNA nucleotide sequences with extensive complementarity to the 3&apos; terminal region of B. subtilis 16S rRNA, followed by an initiation codon and an open reading frame.    RNA polymerase holoenzymes from many bacterial species share a common promoter recognition specificity since they use the same promoter sites on a variety of templates. These promoters generally include sequences homologous to the average sequences -TTGACA- and -TATAATA-, located -35 and -10 base pairs, respectively, upstream of the transcriptional state site. We have isolated a minor form of B. subtilis RNA polymerase in which the normal sigma subunit (sigma 55) is replaced by a smaller polypeptide (sigma 28) and which is highly specific for a class of promoter sites not used by the sigma 55-holoenzyme. Sequencing of two B. subtilis promoter sites used by the sigma 28-holoenzyme reveals identical sequences at -35 and -10 base pairs from the start site, which are -CTAAA- and -CCGATAT-, respectively. These results confirm that sigma subunit plays a major direct role in promoter sequence recognition, and support a model in which sigma interacts sequentially with -35 and -10 regions, respectively.    We report the nucleotide sequence of the promoter for a Bacillus subtilis gene (spoVC) whose transcription is controlled by a 37,000 dalton species of B. subtilis sigma factor known as sigma 37 but not by the principal- sigma factor of 55,000 daltons (sigma 55). Using S1 nuclease mapping we show that the startpoint for sigma 37-directed transcription of the spoVC gene in vitro corresponded closely to the 5&apos; terminus of in vivo synthesized spoVC RNA. The binding site for sigma 37-containing RNA polymerase extended from 43 bp to 51 bp (positions -43 to -51) upstream from the transcription startpoint to 22 bp (position +22) downstream from the startpoint. The nucleotide sequence of the spoVC promoter differed significantly from promoters whose recognition is controlled by sigma 55 but was similar to other sigma 37- controlled promoters in regions known to be important in promoter recognition. Our results are consistent with the hypothesis (Lee and Pero, J. Mol. Biol., in press) that sigma factors work by contacting specific bases in both the -35 and -10 regions of promoters.    The Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase sigma subunit and the phage SPO1-coded gene 28 protein are responsible for selective binding of RNA polymerase to early and middle SPO1 promoters, respectively. The association of the RNA polymerase core with each of these subunits weakens during the elongation of RNA chains. Similar changes are known to be an essential part of the Escherichia coli RNA polymerase sigma cycle.    The base sequence of the ribosome binding site region of the Gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus beta-lactamase gene has been determined. The leader peptide sequence of 24 amino acids which precedes the NH2 terminus of extracellular S. aureus beta-lactamase has also been established. This initiation site possesses two unique features not observed for most initiation sites recognized by Escherichia coli ribosomes. A novel initiation codon, UUG, initiates protein synthesis with methionine; and a very strong Shine-Dalgarno complementarity containing five G-C base pairs precedes the UUG initiation codon. The strong Shine-Dalgarno complementarity may explain the reduced translational dependence on initiation factor IF-3 function that has been observed for the beta-lactamase mRNA and other mRNAs from Gram-positive bacteria. We suggest that this extent of complementarity between the mRNA and this extent of complementarity between the mRNA and the ribosome may be a requirement for efficient initiation by Bacillus subtilis and other Gram-positive ribosomes, and may provide the basis for the observed inability of the Gram-positive systems to translate most of the mRNAs from Gram-negative bacteria.    A plasmid carrying the Gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus PC1 beta-lactamase gene is active in directing a cell-free transcription and translation system from Bacillus subtilis. The major protein synthesized has been identified as the S. aureus beta-lactamase on the basis of peptide mapping. The protein is larger than the extracellular enzyme by about Mr = 3100. Significant in vitro translation of the beta-lactamase mRNA occurs in the absence of the initiation factor fraction as is characteristic of translation of mRNAs of Gram-positive origin. The 1250 base transcript that encodes the beta-lactamase and leader sequence has been mapped on the plasmid molecule.    The effects of oxolinic acid and novobiocin - which respectively inhibit the A and B subunits of DNA gyrase, and therefore inhibit DNA synthesis - have examined in sporulating cultures of Bacillus subtilis. Although both inhibitors prevent sporulation, this is not due to inhibition of DNA synthesis. Instead, they affect protein synthesis generally, though weakly, but have very marked effects on the formation of individual enzymes. These effects are reproducible, but the type of enzyme that will be affected is not predictable. The results point to an involvement of DNA gyrase in the transcription of some genes. This is suggested as the reason for the effect of the inhibitors on spore formation, which they block mainly at Stage O-I.    We removed by recombinant deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) techniques a small DNA segment from within a cloned gene (the 0.4 kb gene) in which transcription in under sporulation control in Bacillus subtilis. These deletion mutation was introduced into the B. subtilis chromosome by transformation with cloned DNA. Competent cells bearing a mutation (tms-26) that is closely linked to the 0.4 kb gene were transformed with linearized plasmid DNA containing the truncated 0.4 kb gene and the wild-type allele of the tms locus. Selection for Tms+ transformants yielded oligosporogenous mutants of unusually dark-brown colony pigmentation. This phenotype was caused by a mutation which mapped at or very near the site of the 0.4 kg gene deletion, whose presence and position in chromosomal DNA was confirmed by Southern hybridization analysis. Phase-contrast microscopy and electron microscopy showed that the mutation, which we designated as spoVG, impaired sporulation at about the fifth stage; bacteria harboring the spoVG mutation proceeded normally through stage IV of development but frequently lysed thereafter, apparently as a result of disintegration of an immature spore cortex. This identifies the 0.4 kb gene (or DNA in its immediate vicinity) as a new sporulation locus and shows that its product functions at a late stage in development.    We have isolated and partially sequenced the gene coding for alpha-amylase (EC 3.2.1.1) from Bacillus amyloliquefaciens by molecular cloning in the plasmid pUB110 using Bacillus subtilis as a host. The nucleotide sequence of the NH2-terminal region of the cloned gene was determined and found to contain a 31-residue-long stretch of amino acids preceding the NH2-terminal sequence of the extracellular alpha-amylase. Within this sequence there is a 15-residue-long stretch of uncharged amino acids similar to that found at the NH2 terminus of other precursors to exported proteins. This &quot;signal sequence&quot; is probably removed in conjunction with the translocation of alpha-amylase through the cytoplasmic membrane. In vitro labeling of alpha-amylase with radioactive amino acids in a coupled transcription-translation system followed by partial sequencing established the exact location of the NH2 terminus of the alpha-amylase gene. The nucleotide sequence preceding the NH2 terminus has properties resembling the RNA-polymerase- and ribosome-binding sites found at the 5&apos; terminus of many prokaryotic genes.    When exponentially growing cells of Bacillus subtilis were treated with rifampin or lipiarmycin, both inhibitors of the initiation of ribonucleic acid synthesis, large amounts of (p)ppGpp accumulated. This accumulation appears to be independent of the ribosome-dependent stringent factor reaction because both relA and relC mutants responded in a manner similar to that of the wild type. The possibility that ribonucleic acid polymerase is directly involved in (p)ppGpp metabolism is discussed.    We have determined the nucleotide sequence of the promoter for aB. subtilis gene (the 0.4 kb gene) whose transcription is under developmental control. Transcription of the 0.4 kb gene is turned on at the onset of sporulation; this RNA synthesis depends on the products of the B. subtilis regulatory genes (the spoO loci) that control the initiation of development. Recognition of the 0.4 kb gene promoter in vitro is dictated by novel species of B. subtilis RNA polymerase sigma factor known as sigma 37 and sigma 29 but not by the principal B. subtilis sigma factor sigma 55. Using S1 nuclease mapping, runoff transcription and dinucleotide priming, we have identified dual startpoints (separated by about 10 bp) for sigma37-directed transcription of the 0.4 kb gene These start-points correspond closely to the 5&apos; termini of 0.4 kb RNA synthesized in vivo during the course of sporulation. Two forms of sigma37 containing RNA polymerase were distinguished that preferentially utilize either the upstream or the downstream startpoint in vitro. We investigated the requirements for sigma37-directed transcription by constructing in vitro deletion mutations that extend from the upstream direction into the 0.4 kb promoter region. One such deletion, which terminates 40 and 51 bp upstream from the transcription startpoints (thereby removing a highly AT-rich 26 bp sequence), completely eliminates transcription from the downstream startpoint but only partially inhibits transcription from the upstream startpoint. A second deletion that terminates at the upstream startpoint completely prevents transcription from both initiation sites. The implications of 0.4 kb gene promoter structure for developmentally regulated transcription of B, subtilis are discussed.    Cells of Bacillus subtilis synthesize a relatively long-lived ribonucleic acid (RNA) of about 300 bases during the course of spore formation. This transcript does not appear until an intermediate stage (III or IV) of development but is the predominant sporulation-specific transcript among RNAs of discrete size in late (stages IV to VI) developing cells. Appearance of the 300-base RNA is under sporulation control as this transcript could not be detected in cells of an early-blocked sporulation mutant (Spo0A). We have located the coding sequence for the 300-base RNA within a cloned chromosomal segment from the purA-cysA region that was previously shown to contain a cluster of genes that are actively transcribed during sporulation. The coding sequence for the 300-base RNA (designated as the 0.3 kb gene) mapped between a gene (veg) that was actively transcribed during growth and development and a gene (0.4 kb) that was turned on at the onset of sporulation. Although clustered within a small segment of the chromosome, the veg, 0.3 kb, and 0.4 kb transcription units exhibited, therefore, distinct patterns of temporally programmed gene expression. Models for the activation of the 0.3 kb gene at an intermediate stage of development are discussed.    We describe a model system for studying developmentally regulated transcription during spore formation in Bacillus subtilis. This model system is a cloned cluster of genes known as 0.4 kb, ctc, and veg from the purA-cysA region of the B. subtilis chromosome. Each gene exhibited a distinct pattern of transcription in cells growing in glucose medium and in cells deprived of nutrients in sporulation medium. The 0.4 kb gene was transcribed at a low level in growing cells but was actively transcribed during nutrient deprivation in sporulation medium. This ribonucleic acid (RNA) synthesis was dependent upon the products of five B. subtilis genes that are involved in the initiation of spore formation:spo0A, spo0A, spo0E, spo0F, and spo0H. A mutation in any one of these regulatory genes severely restricted transcription of the 0.4 kb sequence. Transcription of the ctc gene was also turned on by nutrient deprivation, but this RNA synthesis was not impaired in spo0 mutants. Although not under spo0 control, the ctc gene probably corresponds to a locus, spoVC, whose product is required at a late stage of sporulation. Finally, the veg gene was actively transcribed both in growing cells and in nutrient-deprived cells. Like ctc RNA synthesis, transcription of the veg gene was not dependent upon the spo0 gene products. We propose that the spo0A, spo0B, spo0E, spo0F, and spo0H gene products are components of a pathway(s) that senses nutrient deprivation in B. subtilis and translates this environmental signal into the transcriptional activation of a subset of developmental genes.    We have examined the effect of the delta subunit of the Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase on the formation of closed, open, and stably initiated complexes with Hha I restriction fragments of phage SP82 DNA; the effect of delta on the transcription of these DNA fragments has also been investigated. In vitro, the holoenzyme (core-sigma-delta) bound to and transcribed the same regions of the phage genome that are transcribed in vivo early in infection. In the absence of the delta subunit, the polymerase (core-sigma) bound nonspecifically and transcribed regions of the genome other than those containing early phage genes. Addition of delta to preparations of core-sigma restored the pattern of binding and transcription observed with the holoenzyme. Similarly, delta-less preparations of two SP82-modified forms of polymerase (the enzyme isolated at 8 min after infection and the enzyme isolated 20 min after infection) bound nonspecifically and transcribed regions of the genome other than those containing &quot;middle&quot; and &quot;late&quot; genes. Addition of delta to these preparations resulted in patterns of binding and transcription expected for enzymes functioning a middle and late times of infection, respectively. Quantitation of polymerase-DNA complexes at various temperatures, NaCl concentrations, and polymerase-DNA ratios supported the conclusion that delta enhanced promoter selection.    Bacillus subtilis sporulating cells at stage III were fractionated into mother cell and forespore fractions by means of a lysozyme-detergent method. Three forms of DNA-dependent RNA polymerase enzymes, termed M sigma, F sigma, and F delta, in addition to core enzyme (alpha 2, beta&apos;, and beta) have been purified from the cell fractions. Enzymes M sigma and F sigma are present in the mother cell and forespore, respectively, and contain sigma factor of 55,000 daltons in addition to the core subunits. On the other hand, enzyme F delta is present specifically in the forespore and contains delta 1 factor of 28,000 daltons instead of the sigma factor. The amount of RNA polymerase in the forespore is about twice that in the mother cell. The enzymes M sigma and F sigma also differed in their elution profiled from DEAE-cellulose columns and in their heat stabilities indicating that the two sigma-containing holoenzyme forms may be different in their structural properties. The enzyme F delta transcribed B. subtilis DNA about 1.6 times more actively than enzyme F sigma, and the enzymes M sigma and F sigma transcribed the DNA about 2.2 times more actively than did core enzyme.    Sau 3A1 partial digestion fragments from Bacillus thuringiensis var. kurstaki HD-1 plasmid DNA were ligated into the BamHI site of the cloning vector pBR322 and transformed into Escherichia coli strain HB101. Colonies presumed to contain recombinant plasmids were screened for production of an antigen that would react with antibody made against B. thuringiensis crystals. One strain, ES12, was isolated by using this procedure. ES12 contains a plasmid of Mr 11 X 10(6) that has DNA sequence homology with pBR322 as well as with Mr 30 X 10(6) and Mr 47 X 10(6) plasmids of B. thuringiensis. It makes a protein antigen, detected by antibodies to crystal, which has the same electrophoretic mobility as the B. thuringiensis crystal protein. Protein extracts of ES12 are toxic to larvae of the tobacco hornworm Manduca sexta.    Preparations of Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase (nucleosidetriphosphate:RNA nucleotidyltransferase, EC 2.7.7.6) from vegetatively growing cells contain small amounts of an activity (B. subtilis RNA polymerase holoenzyme II) that shows a unique promoter specificity with T7 bacteriophage DNA as compared with the normal B. subtilis holoenzyme (holoenzyme I) and lacks the normal sigma subunit [Jaehning, J. A., Wiggs, J. L. &amp; Chamberlin, M. J. (1979) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 76, 5470-5474]. By heparin-agarose chromatography we have obtained holoenzyme II fractions that have no detectable holoenzyme I activity as judged by their failure to utilize promoter sites for holoenzyme I on any template we have tested. These fractions are far more active with B. subtilis DNA than with T7 DNA or other heterologous templates. This high degree of specificity has allowed identification of plasmids containing cloned fragments of B. subtilis DNA that bear strong promoter sites for holoenzyme II. These promoter sites are not used at all by B. subtilis RNA polymerase holoenzyme I. The specificity of holoenzyme II is dictated by a peptide of Mr 28,000 as judged by copurification of the peptide with specific holoenzyme II activity and by reconstitution of the holoenzyme II promoter specificity when the isolated peptide is added to B. subtilis core polymerase. Hence the 28,000 Mr peptide appears to be a sigma factor that determines a promoter specificity distinct from that of RNA polymerase holoenzyme I and all other known bacterial RNA polymerases.    Transcription of SP82 and SP01 DNAs in vitro by Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase yielded mostly large RNA species, with many in excess of 1,500 bases in length, whereas most of the RNAs synthesized in vivo early in infection were much smaller. Addition of an extract from uninfected B. subtilis to reaction mixtures containing RNAs synthesized in vitro generated additional discrete RNAs whose mobilities on polyacrylamide gels matched the mobilities of some of the smaller RNAs synthesized in vivo.    Previous observations concerning the ability of the spore-converting bacteriophage PMB12 to cause sporulation in certain sporulation-deficient mutants of Bacillus subtilis 168 were extended to include a spoOK mutant and a mutant temperature sensitive for sporulation due to a ribosomal mutation. Mutants of PMB12 that were unable to induce sporulation in the spoOK mutant were isolated to determine whether PMB12-encoded products had to affect the sporulation-specific functions of both the transcription and the translation systems of B. subtilis to induce sporulation. A complementation assay for spore conversion was used to assign the spore conversion-negative PMB12 mutants to four groups. One group of mutants repressed the ability of wild-type PMB12 to induce sporulation. None of the spore conversion-negative PMB12 mutants could induce significant levels of sporulation in B. subtilis mutants that were temperature sensitive for sporulation due to mutations in the beta subunit of ribonucleic acid polymerase or the 30S ribosomal subunit. Our data suggest that PMB12 may have at least three genes for spore conversion. The products of these genes apparently interact with a host cell pathway that is expressed during the earliest stage of sporulation and is not dependent for expression upon sporulation-specific functions of the host cell&apos;s transcription and translation systems.    We have isolated a sigma-like regulatory protein termed sigma 29 whose synthesis or association with Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase was induced during spore formation. sigma 29 is a sporulation-specific component of RNA polymerase as it was absent in enzyme from an early-blocked sporulation mutant (SpoOA). We have demonstrated specific RNA synthesis by sigma 29-RNA polymerase using as a DNA template a cloned cluster of vegetative and sporulation genes from the purA-cysA region of the B. subtilis chromosome. The pattern of gene recognition by sigma 29-RNA polymerase was distinct from that observed for RNA polymerases containing sigma 55 or sigma 37, species of sigma factor that are present in vegetative cells of B. subtilis. A reconstitution experiment in which purified sigma 29 was added to core RNA polymerase demonstrates that sigma 29 was directly responsible for the altered transcriptional specificity of sporulation RNA polymerase. We propose that sigma 29 is a regulatory protein that controls developmental gene transcription at an early stage of spore formation.    The Bacillus subtilis mutant cal1 carries a non-reverting mutation in ribosomal protein L17 (r-protein L17) that causes both resistance to the antibiotic chalcomycin (Calr) and temperature-sensitive sporulation (Spots). Second-site suppressor (rev) mutations that relieve the Spots phenotype have been isolated from cal1. Three suppressor mutations - rev4, rev10, rev11 - each increase the sporulation frequency of cal1 at the non-permissive temperature from 3% to 95% of the wild-type level. The cal1 rev strains remain resistant to chalcomycin and two-dimensional gel electrophoresis analysis indicates that they contain the same altered r-protein L17 as the original cal1 strain and no additional altered r-proteins. The three rev mutations have been mapped at a single locus between narA and sacA on the B. subtilis chromosome and recombination indexes for the rev mutations indicate that they are tightly linked to one another. Antibiotic resistance Spots mutations that cause temperature-sensitive sporulation have previously been isolated in RNA polymerase, in the 30S and 50S subunits of the ribosome, and in elongation factor G. The rev4, 10, and 11 suppressor mutations are non-specific in their action in that they restore significant levels of sporulation at the non-permissive temperature in all of the Spots strains that we have tested. This result suggests that Spots mutations in components of the B. subtilis transcription and translation systems share a common molecular basis for their sporulation-defective phenotypes.    Transcriptional complexes formed in vitro using DNA of B. subtilis phage SPP1 as template and E. coli and B. subtilis RNA polymerases were analyzed by electron microscopy. Both enzymes recognize the same five strong promoters in the early region of the genome. Strand selection at these sites was identical with both enzymes. These results correlate well with data obtained from in vivo transcription studies. Transcriptional activity in the late region of the genome was very low, not permitting the identification of promoter sites.    The affinity of Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase sigma and delta subunits to DNA was examined by a non-denaturing polyacrylamide slab gel electrophoresis method which made it possible to resolve DNA-bound and free subunits. The results revealed that sigma subunit, but not delta subunit had a relatively high affinity for double stranded DNA. The sigma subunit was bound maximally to super-coiled pGR1-3 plasmid DNA at a mass ratio of sigma/DNA of 0.7. With B. subtilis double stranded linear DNA one sigma subunit was bound per approximately 1,000 base pairs. The sigma-DNA complex was sufficiently stable for isolation by a molecular gel filtration column. The sigma subunit had much higher affinity for super-coiled than for linear pGR1-3 DNA or for linear double stranded or denatured DNA from B. subtilis, E. coli, and calf thymus. These results indicate that the free B. subtilis sigma subunit, in contrast to the E. coli sigma subunit, can bind by itself to DNA.    In the preceding paper (Amann et al. 1981) we described the in vitro construction of hybrids between Escherichia coli phage lambda NM607 imm434 and B. subtilis phage SPP1. These lambda/SPP1 hybrids have been used to infect minicells produced by E. coli strain DS410. Analysis on polyacrylamide gels of 35S-methionine labeled proteins synthesized in infected minicells revealed the expression of both lambda and SPP1 genes. Infection of E. coli minicells carrying plasmid pGY101, which encodes and expresses the repressor gene of phage 434, results in the selective expression of the cloned SPP1 DNA. This has resulted in the assignment of 26 out of a total of 46 known SPP1 polypeptides (Mertens et al. 1979) to individual SPP1 DNA fragments. In addition, several lambda/SPP1 fusion peptides whose transcription either originates from lambda promoters or from promoters located on the inserted SPP1 fragment, were identified.    The temporal program of SPP1 transcription was examined by hybridizing RNA extracted from infected B. subtilis cells, pulse-labelled at various times after infection, to restriction fragments of SPP1 DNA. RNA made early after infection hybridises to contiguous fragments in the left part of the SPP1 molecule, whereas hybridization to fragments in the right part of the chromosome is found late in infection. Viral gene transcription proceeds from right to left on the H-strand throughout the lytic cycle. At late times transcription occurs also from left to right using the L-strand as template. These assignments follow from the established 5&apos;--3&apos; polarity of the complementary (H- and L-) strains of SPP1 DNA and the determination of strand specificity in SPP1 transcription. Early and late transcriptions are also defined physiologically: protein synthesis and phage DNA replication must precede late transcription.    A restriction map was constructed for the 17.5-kilobase SalI C fragment of SP82 DNA. Unfractionated SP82 DNA, the SalI C fragment, and restriction fragments derived from SalI-C were used as templates for in vitro synthesis by the Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase, and the resulting transcripts were analyzed by gel electrophoresis. Comparison of the RNA species obtained from SalI-C with those produced from unfractionated DNA indicated that most of the RNAs and all of the major transcripts originate from the SalI C fragment; this fragment contains one copy of the terminally redundant portion of the genome. Seven major transcripts, a bidirectional terminator site, and 5 of the 13 minor transcripts were located within the 13-kilobase redundant region. The binding of polymerase to fragments of DNA produced by digestion of SalI-C with HpaII and HhaI was used to identify promoter-bearing regions within SalI-C.    Radioimmunoassay analysis of enteric and some other Gram-negative bacteria has shown that the antigenic structure of the RNA polymerase alpha subunit is more conserved than that of the beta and beta&apos; subunits. Since anti-alpha antibodies do not affect RNA polymerase activity, the constraints which determine the low variability of the antigenic structure of the alpha subunit are not directly related to its functional role. The antigenic determinants of the alpha subunit located on the surface of the RNA polymerase molecule are more conserved than those involved in contacts with other subunits; an opposite tendency characterizes the beta subunit. The range of variability of the antigenic determinants buried inside the RNA polymerase molecule suggests that the subunits are attached to each other rather loosely. Immunological comparison of RNA polymerases provides a simple method for reconstructing bacterial genealogies. The genealogy of the bacteria examined is essentially in agreement with phylogenetic trees based on 16S and 5S rRNA sequence characterization. This argues against extensive interspecific transfer of genes coding for components of the transcription and translation apparatus.    Some of the properties of the RNA polymerase purified from SPO1-infected Bacillus subtilis have been compared with the properties of RNA polymerase from uninfected cells (core + sigma). The two enzymes synthetize RNA from nonoverlapping regions on SPO1 DNA, and they lead to the retention of different restriction fragments of SPO1 DNA on cellulose-nitrate filters. The action of the positively regulating product of gene 28 of SPO1 (gp 28) has been analyzed. The isolated gp 28 has been shown to be unable to increase the dissociation rate of core + sigma from SPP1 DNA, while it efficiently blocks the initiation of RNA synthesis if it is added to performed complexes between core + sigma and SPP1 DNA in 0.2 M NaCl.    the ability of the core isolated from Escherichia coli RNA polymerase to interact with specificity-determining subunits isolated from Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase has been determined by measuring the transcription of &quot;early&quot; and &quot;middle&quot; genes of phage SP82. Two specificity-determining subunits were tested: the sigma subunit and a 28,000 dalton (28 K) peptide isolated from a modified polymerase produced at approximately 8 min after infection of B. subtilis with SP82. Earlier experiments (Spiegelman, G. B. and Whiteley, H. R. (1978) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 81, 1058-1065) demonstrated that sigma and the 28K peptide are required for the recognition of early and middle gene promoters, respectively, by the B. subtilis core assembly. The present investigation showed that E. coli core interacted more efficiently with the B. subtilis sigma than with the 28K peptide, as judged by the rate of RNA synthesis. Early RNA was produced by the E. coli and B. subtilis holoenzymes and by E. coli core supplenented with B. subtilis sigma and only minor differences were found in comparisons of transcripts by hybridization and by electrophoretic analysis. Measurements of template specificity, the formation of stable enzyme . DNA complexes, and the hybridization of transcripts to fragments of SP82 DNA produced by digestion with restriction endonuclease Hha indicated that E. coli core supplemented with the 28K-supplemented E. coli core with those synthesized by the modified polymerase extracted from B. subtilis 8 min after infection with SP82 suggest that both preparations recognized the same initiation and termination sequences.    The DNA sequence of the ermC gene of plasmid pE194 is presented. This determinant is responsible for erythromycin-induced resistance to the macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin B group of antibiotics and specifies a 29,000 dalton inducible protein. The locations of the ermC promoter, as well as that of a probable transcriptional terminator, are established both from the sequence and by transcription mapping. The sequence contains an open reading frame sufficient to encode the previously identified 29,000 dalton ermC protein. Between the promoter and the putative ATG start codon is a 141 base pair leader sequence, within which several regulatory (constitutive) mutations have been mapped and sequenced. The leader has a second open reading frame, sufficient to encode a 19 amino acid peptide. It is suggested that induction by erythromycin involves a shift between alternative ribosome-bound mRNA conformations, so that the ribosome binding sequence and the start codon for synthesis of the 29K protein are unmasked in the presence of inducer. Possible active and inactive folded configuration of the leader sequence are presented, as well as the effects on these configurations of regulatory mutations.    A modified form of Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase (RNA nucleotidyltransferase) has been isolated that exhibits distinctive transcriptional specificity. This modified enzyme transcribes two cloned genes from the purA-cysA region of the B. subtilis chromosome whose expression in vivo is associated with the process of sporulation. Neither of these genes is transcribed by the usual form of B. subtilis RNA polymerase holoenzyme containing a sigma factor of 55,000 daltons (sigma 55). The modified RNA polymerase lacks sigma 55 but contains a newly identified subunit of 37,000 daltons termed sigma 37. A reconstitution experiment in which sigma 37 was added to core RNA polymerase strongly suggests that sigma 37 is responsible for the transcriptional specificity of the modified RNA polymerase. Sigma 37 apparently acts at the level of promoter recognition; this transcriptional determinant enabled core RNA polymerase to form stable binary and ternary (&quot;initiation&quot;) complexes with endonuclease restriction fragments containing promoters for the cloned B. subtilis genes.    The complete nucleotide sequences of the various precursor 5S RNA species occurring in Bacillus licheniformis have been elucidated. The B. licheniformis precursors contain a 5&apos;-precursor-specific segment of 95 nucleotides which is four times as long as the corresponding segment of the p5S RNAs from the closely related strains B. subtilis (Sogin, M.L., Pace, N.R., Rosenberg, M., Weissman, S.M. (1976) J. Biol. Chem. 251, 3480-3488) and Bacillus Q (Stiekema, W.J., Raue, H.A., Planta, R.J. (1980) Nucl. Ac. Res. 8, 2193-2211). However, fourteen of the sixteen nucleotides at the 5&apos;-end are identical in the precursors from all three strains. These conserved nucleotides can form a stem and loop structure which is likely to play an important role in the biosynthesis of 5S RNA. Extension secondary and tertiary structure is present in the 5&apos;-precursor-specific segment as concluded from the results of digestion with RNAase T1 both of the isolated segment and the intact precursors. No sequence homology exists between the 3&apos;-precursor-specific segments of the B. licheniformis precursors and those of the other two strains except for a stretch of U residues at the 3-terminus. This stretch of U residues is not immediately preceded by a hairpin loop, however, as expected for a transcription termination signal (20). The question whether the precursors have already undergone processing at the 3&apos;-end, therefore, remains open. The total number of genetically distinct precursor species in B. licheniformis is at least five and at most ten. Most likely each ribosomal RNA cistron produces a separate p5S RNA as is also the case in Bacillus Q.    Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase holoenzyme transcribes phi 29 DNA in vitro producing five major RNA species defined by characteristic electrophoretic mobilities. In addition to these products, Escherichia coli RNA polymerase transcribes phi 29 DNA to yield three RNA species not detected when transcribing with the B. subtilis enzyme under the same optimal reaction conditions for RNA synthesis. Transcriptional analysis of purified restriction fragments and exonuclease III-digested DNA established locations of six promoter and three termination sites defining the eight transcripts. The transcription map shows that E. coli RNA polymerase initiates transcription at three sites not efficiently utilized by the B. subtilis enzyme. However, initiation by the B. subtilis polymerase from at least two of these sites could be detected at E:DNA ratios greater than 10 in the absence of competing promoters. These results indicate that differences between the two polymerases in promoter utilization are not explained by specificity of promoter binding, but represent differences in responding to promoter strength. Transcription of phi 29 DNA and T7 DNA by E. coli core polymerase with either B. subtilis or E. coli sigma subunits results in formation of transcripts identical with those produced by E. coli holoenzyme, suggesting that core polymerase contains elements important in determining relative promoter strength. The efficiency of rifampicin-resistant complex formation on phi 29 and T7 promoters is also dependent upon the source of core polymerase.    Ribonucleic acid (RNA) synthesis was examined in cold-shocked Bacillus subtilis cells. The cells were grown to mid-log stage, harvested, and cold shocked. RNA synthesis was monitored by the incorporation of [3H]uridine triphosphate or [alpha 32P]adenosine triphosphate into trichloroacetic acid-precipitable material in the presence of all four nucleoside triphosphates. The inhibition of RNA synthesis in cold-shocked cells by lipiarmycin, ethidium bromide, rifampin. or streptolydigin was analyzed using mutant or wild-type cells. Also examined were the effects of temperature, salt concentration, and the addition of polyamines or highly phosphorylated nucleotides. In ultraviolet-irradiated and cold-shocked cells, RNA wynthesis decreased to low levels. The addition of exogenous phi 29 or TSP-1 template to these cells caused a 13- to 20-fold increase in RNA synthesis, as monitored by trichloroacetic acid-precipitable counts. RNA synthesized in the presence of phi 29 deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) hybridizes mainly to EcoRI fragments A and C of phi 29 DBA, These two fragments direct transcription by purified RNA polymerase in vitro and hybridize to early phi 29 DNA produced in vivo. Our results with TSP-1 DNA in this system indicated that the RNA produced hybridizes to the same fragments as early RNA produced in vivo. Plasmic pUB110 DNA was not transcribed in this system.    Induction of the synthesis of a plasmid-encoded polypeptide (E3) by erythromycin is known to be required for the inducible expression of resistance to the macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin B group of antibiotics in Bacillus subtilis strains carrying the plasmid pE194. This resistance is mediated by a specific N6-dimethylation of adenine in the 23S rRNA of the large ribosomal subunit. We show in this report that E3 induction is regulated posttranscriptionally in the sense that it can occur when RNA synthesis is blocked and that induction is accompanied by an increase in the functional half-life of E3 mRNA but not of the mRNA species that code for the remaining four known pE194 polypeptides. The induction of E3 is subject to feedback regulation and involves the ribosome. Modification of the erythromycin binding site on the ribosome by methylation or by mutation interferes with induction.    Both bacteriophage T7 and the related bacteriophage T3 have strong termination sites for bacterial RNA polymerase located near 20% on the standard genome map. These termination sites are used with 90% efficiency in vivo, even in cells which contain a defective p protein. Under normal reaction conditions in vitro, Escherichia coli RNA polymerase terminates with 90% efficiency at the T7 terminator site but shows little or no termination at the corresponding T3 locus. Thus, the two templates form an ideal in vitro test system with which to study the parameters that govern transcriptional termination. Termination at these sites has been monitored by following the time course of RNA synthesis under conditions where only a single transcriptional cycle is carried out and by following the size distribution of RNA chains by gel electrophoresis. Termination of the T7 termination site is unaffected by a large variety of changes in reaction conditions, by quantitative cleavage of the nascent RNA during the reaction with a mixture of single- and double-stranded specific ribonucleases, or by a number of different mutations in the subunits of RNA polymerase, including sigma. Similarly, a large variety of changes in reaction conditions fail to enhance termination at the T3 terminator site, including changes in temperature, MgCl2 concentration, and glycerol concentration or the addition of dimethyl sulfoxide, ethanol, or spermidine to the reaction. However, in the presence of elevated salt concentrations, at low ribonucleoside triphosphate concentrations, and in the presence of formamide, efficient in vitro utilization of the T3 terminator is seen. Changes in the RNA polymerase protein can also enhance utilization of the T3 site. A class of rifampicin-resistant rpoB mutants has been identified which produce a rifampicin-resistant RNA polymerase which is able to utilize the T3 terminator site in vitro. Similarly, the normal Bacillus subtilits RNA polymerase utilizes the T3 terminator site in vitro with high efficiency.    Four RNA-polymerizing activities having different subunit composition can be purified from uninfected and from SPO1-infected Bacillus subtilis. Lysozyme and sodium deoxycholate are used for lysing the cells. Polymin P is used for precipitating nucleic acids and DEAE-cellulose chromatography allows separation of enzymatic activity from the residual Polymin P. After these common steps, one can purify core + sigma + delta by chromatography on single-stranded DNA-agarose followed by gel filtration while pure core + sigma can be obtained by chromatography on double-stranded DNA cellulose. Core + delta is obtained by high-salt sucrose/glycerol gradient centrifugation. The host enzyme modified by the product of gene 28 of phage SPO1 can be purified from SPO1 infected cells by chromatography on DNA cellulose (or CNA agarose) followed by chromatography on phosphocellulose. The pH and salt dependance of the initial rate of RNA synthesis of core + sigma has been investigated using SPO1 and SPP1 DNA as templates. The optimum pH for the initial rate of transcription is 8.2 at 30 degrees C in 50 mM N,N-bis(2-hydroxyethyl)glycine buffer, and the optimum Na+ concentration is between 0.1 and 0.15 M. The kinetics of formation and of dissociation of non-filterable complexes between SPP1 DNA and core + sigma have been analyzed at different cationic concentrations. The value of the rate constant of dissociation in 0.1 M NaCl at 30 degrees C is kd = 2.16 x 10(-4) S-1. The value of the rate constant of association, under the same conditions, is ka = 5.5 x 10(8) M-1 S-1; this value is compatible with a diffusion-controlled reaction for promoter selection.    A segment of Bacillus subtilis deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) previously cloned in Escherichia coli contains a gene (the 0.4-kilobase [kb] gene) whose transcription is activated at an early stage of spore development. To map the genetic location of the 0.4-kb gene, we constructed a hybrid plasmid that inserts a chloramphenicol resistance determinant into the B. subtilis chromosome by recombination at a site of homology between cloned B. subtilis DNA and the chromosome. This hybrid plasmid (p1949-2) was constructed from the E. coli plasmid pMB9, the B. sultilis chloramphenicol resistance plasmid pCM194 (whose replication function was inactivated), and B. subtilis DNA from the vicinity of the 0.4-kb gene. Transformation of B. subtilis cells to drug resistance by p1949-2 was dependent upon the B. subtilis RecE+ phenotype and resulted in specific and predictable changes in the pattern of endonuclease restriction sites in the 0.4-kb gene region of the chromosome. Chloramphenicol resistance in cells transformed by p1949-2 was mapped to the purA-cysA region of the B. subtilis chromosome, a region. In addition, DNA adjacent to the 0.4-kb gene was shown to contain the wild-type allele of genetic marker (tms-26) from that region.    Novobiocin inhibited ribonculeic acid synthesis during germination of Bacillus subtilis spores. Transcription of certain kinds of genes probably required a preceding conformational change in deoxyribonucleic acid.    The study of the structure of the operons tryptophan, phenylalanine and histidine has indicated that the transcription of these operons is controlled by the level of aminoacylation of the corresponding tRNAs which modulates the termination of transcription at an attenuator site. The derepression of the level of two enzymes responsible for the biosynthesis of glutamate and glutamine in Escherichia coli, following a decrease of the level of aminoacylation of tRNAglutamate in vivo, suggests that attenuator sites are involved in the control of the transcription of the two operons coding for these enzymes. The fact that tRNAglutamate is involved in this regulation whereas tRNAglutamine is not, supports the model of an evolution of the gene for the glutaminyl-tRNA synthetase of E. coli from the gene of a primitive glutamyl-tRNA synthetase similar to that of Bacillus subtilis.    We have used lipiarmycin, a specific inhibitor of initiation of transcription, to study the role of host RNA polymerase in the transcription programs of various phages of Bacillus subtilis. Unlike rifampin, lipiarmycin preferentially inhibits transcription dependent on the sigma subunit of RNA polymerase because it inactivates holoenzyme at a much greater rate than it does core enzyme. With phage SP01, addition of lipiarmycin at a middle-to-late time of infection did not inhibit phage production even though phage production was sensitive to addition of rifampin at that time. This result is consistent with the notion that unmodified host RNA polymerase holoenzyme becomes dispensable after transcription of early classes of SP01 genes, even though host core enzyme is required for synthesis of all classes of phage RNA. SP01-modified forms of RNA polymerase, which lack sigma subunit but contain phage-coded polypeptides and are able to transcribe middle and late genes, were resistant to lipiarmycin in vitro. For phage phi 105, phage development was sensitive to both lipiarmycin and rifampin in wild-type cells and resistant to both drugs in resistant mutant cells, leading to the conclusion that the activity of host holoenzyme was required for phage RNA synthesis. Growth of phage PBS2, which was resistant to rifampin, was sensitive to the addition of lipiarmycin at early times of infection of a wild-type host strain. In a lipiarmycin-resistant mutant host, PBS2 growth was resistant to lipiarmycin. This result suggests that host holoenzyme plays a previously unanticipated role in transcription of PBS2 genes.    A protein has been isolated from Bacillus subtilis which has functions similar to that of transcription termination factor rho (rho) from Escherichia coli. The apparent molecular weight of the B. subtilis rho factor is about 80000-95000 as estimated by a non-denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis method. It contains two subunits with a molecular weight of 47000 as determined by sodium dodecylsulfate/polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The rho factor shows poly(C)-dependent beta-gamma ATPase activity and depresses the activity of RNA synthesis from B. subtilis phage rho 29 DNA template with purified B. subtilis RNA polymerase holoenzyme. The specific activity of the poly(C)-dependent ATPase of the B. subtilis rho factor was significantly less than that of the E. coli rho factor. In the presence of rho factor fewer RNA transcripts were produced overall from the rho 29 template and smaller RNA transcripts with discrete sizes were made. These results suggest that the B. subtilis rho factor can catalyze transcription termination at specific sites on rho 29 phage DNA in vitro.    An immediate precursor of 5S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) from Bacillus subtilis has 21 and 42 nucleotide precursor-specific segments associated with its 5&apos; and 3&apos; termini, respectively. On the basis of its nucleotide sequence, predicted secondary structure and location in the rRNA transcriptional unit, the 3&apos; precursor element apparently functions during the termination of transcription. A portion of the 5&apos; precursor element is shown to facilitate the native folding of the mature domain of the precursor. Precursor 5S rRNA molecules which lack the 5&apos; terminal 8-9 nucleotides of the 5&apos; precursor elements were fabricated. These abbreviated constructs assume a non-native conformation, as revealed by their behavior during polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The aberrant conformation is evidently forced upon the abbreviated constructs by the residual 5&apos; precursor sequence, since its removal by the maturation endonuclease RNAase M5 precipitates the reordering of the mature domain into its native conformation. Inspection of the nucleotide sequence of the 5S precursor suggested the nature of the conformational aberration, and gel electrophoresis analyses of limited nuclease digests of end-labeled precursors in the native and aberrant conformations are consistent with the derived model. We conclude taht the 5&apos; terminal six nucleotides in the intact 5S precursor assist in the folding of the mature domain by forming a base-paired duplex with neighboring nucleotides, thereby preventing that adjacent sequence from engendering the abnormal conformation. The involvement of precursor-specific sequences and conformational dynamics in RNA function are discussed.    The possibility of entomocyde crystal protein synthesis was studied using a heterological cell-free system with Bacillus thuringiensis plasmid DNA as template. The high level of template activity is usual for Bac. thuringiensis plasmid DNA. Immunochemical studies of the in vitro synthesized polypeptides showed that Bac. thuringiensis plasmid DNA does not direct crystal protein synthesis.    We report the nucleotide sequences of two promoters for bacteriophage SP01 &quot;middle&quot; genes. These promoters are recognized by a modified form of Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase that contains a phage-coded &quot;sigma-like&quot; regulatory protein (gp28) in place of the bacterial sigma factor. Both promoters shared the identical hexanucleotide 5&apos;A-G-G-A-G-A at about 35 base pairs preceding the start point of transcription and the identical heptanucleotide 5&apos;-T-T-T-A-T-T-T (T is the thymine analog 5-hydroxymethyluracil in SP01 DNA) located about 10 base pairs preceding the transcriptional start point. The significance of these sequences in comparison with nucleotide sequences of promoters recognized by sigma-containing RNA polymerases is discussed.    Derivatives of the Escherichia coli drug-resistance plasmid pBR316 have been constructed which act as molecular probes for promoter-containing DNA restriction fragments from various prokaryotic genomes. The plasmids, designated pBRH1 and pBRH3B, contain a unique EcoRI restriction site located within the promoter for the tetracycline resistance (Tcr) gene. This site was created by the insertion of a chemically synthesized octanucleotide, containing the EcoRI cleavage sequence, into the HindIII site of pBR316. Base-pair alterations within the Tc promoter produced by this insertion resulted in a substantial reduction (pBRH3B) or elimination (pBRH1) in ability of these plasmids to confer Tc resistance to the host strain. Cloning of EcoRI-cleaved foreign DNA fragments into the EcoRI site of these plasmids allows for the isolation of recombinant transformants with Tcr levels greater than that of the plasmid vector. Further characterization of these recombinant plasmids demonstrates that the Tcr phenotype is dependent upon the orientation of the inserted fragment, but not on the molecular weight. We have concluded that these fragments carry promoters which, in the proper orientation, allow for the transcription of the Tcr gene. The utility of these &quot;promoter-probe&quot; plasmids lies in the ability to select for promoter-containing DNA fragments by insertional activation of the Tcr gene.    A modified form of RNA polymerase from Bacillus subtilis selectively transcribes a cloned gene under early sporulation control. This RNA polymerase lacks sigma factor but contains a newly identified subunit of molecular weight 37,000, termed P37. P37 could be a regulatory protein that controls, at least in part, an early stage of spore development.    We have examined the accumulation of polyphosphorylated nucleotides in Bacillus subtilis in relation to the function of the rel gene. Our results are as follows. (i) During inhibition of isoleucine activation by O-methylthreonine, wildtype B. subtilis cells accumulate unusual nucleotides with the chromatographic and chemical properties of pppApp, ppApp, pppGpp, ppGpp, pGpp, and ppGp. (ii) During the carbon source downshift elicited by inhibiting glucose uptake, we observed accumulation of the polyphosphorylated guanosine but not adenosine nucleotides. (iii) At the end of long phase in sporulation medium, we observed a small transient accumulation of the polyphosphorylated guanosine but not adenosine nucleotides. (iv) We were unable to detect a nucleotide with chromatographic behavior expected for pppAppp under any conditions. (v) The rel mutant of Swanton and Edlin (Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 46-583-588, 1972) did not accumulate any of these polyphosphorylated nucleotides under any of the conditions examined. (vi) the rel mutant is unimpaired in sporulation. We conclude that one or more of the nucleotides we have detected may be involved in controlling the specificity of transcription during the stringent response, but none of them are required for sporogenesis.    We have devised a new procedure for the purification of highly active preparations of Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase holoenzyme. A column of heparin-agarose A-15m is used to rapidly and quantitatively adsorb RNA polymerase from the initial crude extract fraction. This affinity procedure obviates the necessity of including nucleic acid precipitation or partitioning steps and allows for rapid separation of RNA polymerase from proteolytic activity. The enzyme is further purified by preparative glycerol gradient centrifugation resulting in an overall purification in 200-fold in 24 h with near quantitative recovery of polymerase protein and activity. RNA polymerase holoenzyme is obtained by chromatography on single-stranded DNA-agarose. The in vitro transcription products made by purified preparations of B. subtilis and Escherichia coli RNA polymerase holoenzymes in response to B. subtilis phage phi 29 DNA have been analyzed, and an in vitro transcription map is presented. The E. coli RNA polymerase holoenzyme initiates transcription from three promoter sites not efficiently utilized by the B. subtilis holoenzyme under optimal conditions for RNA synthesis.    A cell-free coupled system of transcription and translation using cell extracts from Bacillus subtilis and DNA from phage SP82 has been developed. Under optimum conditions, it incorporated approx. 300 pmol methionine during a 1 h incubation. The activity of the system increased linearly as the concentration of S-150 supernatant fraction protein increased from 125 to 325 microgram per assay. The optimum Mg2+ concentration was 12.5-15 mM. Ribosomes required treatment with DNAase in order to reduce endogenous activity, but the S-150 fraction was kept DNAase-free to prevent degradation of exogenously added DNA. The coupled system was sensitive to inhibitors of RNA and protein synthesis. Kinetic studies showed that the number of pmol of nucleotides present in newly synthesized RNA increased linearly for the first 20-min reaction and that the rate of amino acid incorporation increased linearly for the first 30 min. Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of the in vitro synthesized products yielded a band pattern that closely resembled the pattern of early phage SP82 proteins produced in vivo.    The relationship between sigma (sigma) and delta (delta) factors of Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase has been analyzed during initiation of RNA synthesis. When core enzyme (E) containing delta factor (E delta) binds to DNA, the delta factor is released with the formation of an E-DNA complex. The addition of sigma to the E-DNA complex results in the formation of a stable E sigma-DNA complex which can synthesize RNA upon addition of nucleoside triphosphates. Sigma factor, significantly, is not released from the core during RNA synthesis. These results suggest that delta and sigma factors can act sequentially during initiation of RNA synthesis with delta acting as a DNA recognition factor and sigma acting as an initiation factor. The results do not preclude the possibility that E sigma can initiate RNA synthesis correctly since E sigma alone can bind to DNA and initiate RNA synthesis.    Experiments were carried out to study the formation of extracellular protease by the suspension from Bacillus subtilis str. 103 washed cells selected at the growth stages characterized by the highest rate of the enzyme synthesis (after 12 and 35 hours). In relation to the protein and RNA synthesis as measured by 14C-valine and 14C-uracyl the cells of that age showed a high metabolic activity. The enzyme synthesis by the cells of the log-phase was inhibited completely with chloramphenicol and by the cells of the stationary phase--almost completely. The experiments demonstrated the protease synthesis insensitive to riphampycin for a long time. This may be indicative of a certain pool of long-lived mRNA responsible for the biosynthesis.    Purified DNA-dependent RNA polymerase from Sulfolobus acidocaldarius is composed of 10 different subunits, one of which is present as four copies. Their molecular weights are 122 000, 101 000, 44 000, 32 000, 24 000, 17 500, 13 800, 11 800 (four copies), 11 200, 10 800, summing up to a total Mr of 423 500. The sedimentation velocity is 13.5 S, indicating that at 0.5 M NH4Cl the enzyme exists in the monomeric form. At pH 9.2 in cellogel electrophoresis two of the subunits migrate towards the cathode. The composition is quite different from that of a typical eubacterial RNA polymerase. Its complexity reminds one of eucaryotic RNA polymerase. Maximal transcription of DNA from a Halobacterium halobium phage oH (oH DNA) proceeds at pH 8.5 AND 75 DEGREES C. The enzyme is stable up to 75 degrees C and strictly requires a DNA template. oH DNA and poly[d(A-T) . d(A-T)] are the most efficient. The temperature dependence of the transcription rate is characteristic for the template. Actinomycin D and heparin prevent transcription, while rifampicin, streptolydigin and alpha-amanitin have no effect. During storage, even at -- 70 degrees C, the enzyme loses its activity to transcribe oH DNA, whereas transcription of poly[d(A-T) . D(A-6)] remains unaffected.    Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase have almost identical transcription specificities on bacteriophage SPO1 DNA when assayed in a coupled transcription-translation cell free system. SPO1-modified B. subtilis RNA polymerase has altered transcription specificity. It is shown that rifampicin-inhibited E. coli RNA polymerase can completely block transcription of SPO1 DNA by rifampicin resistant B. subtilis enzyme, whereas it has no effect on transcription by SPO1-modified B. subtilis RNA polymerase. We conclude that the new transcription by SPO1-modified RNA polymerase results from newly recognized promoters, rather than by elongation of transcripts which could also be made by B. subtilis vegetative RNA polymerase.    Minicells produced by B. subtilis CU403divIVB1 and infected by SPP1 synthesize at least 46 polypeptides which can be separated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. These polypeptides represent the expression of 86% of the SPP1 genome&apos;s coding capacity. Infection of minicells by sus mutants and deletion mutants of SPP1 has permitted a correlation of genetic location with gene product and has shown that SPP1 normally synthesizes at least 8 non-essential polypeptides. Restriction fragments of SPP1 produced by EcoRI digestion of SPP1 DNA have been purified and used as template DNA in a coupled transcription/translation system derived from E. coli to determine the polypeptides encoded by the individual fragments. SPP1 expression in minicells differs from SPP1 expression in nucleated cells (Esche, 1975) in that late syntheses are not dependent on phage DNA replication in infected minicells.    Hybrid-competition analyses were done to estimate the relatedness of 3H-labeled mRNA species synthesized during spore germination and log-phase growth. The competitions showed that early in the germination process 10--15 and 1--3% of the RNA transcribed from the H and from the L strand, respectively, were unique and absent during log-phase growth. At later stages, the amounts of the germination-specific H transcripts decreased more rapidly than the L transcripts. The competitions with pulse-labeled log-phase RNAs showed that vegetative genes were transcribed more rapidly from the H strand than from the L strand. Most of the results could be correlated with the observed decrease in the H/L asymmetry ration during spore germination.    The relative transcription from L and H strands of Bacillus subtilis DNA during consecutive stages of spore outgrowth was determined and compared to the transcription pattern during log-phase growth of vegetative cells. Pulses of [3H] uridine were administered during early, middle and late outgrowth phases of germination and the RNAs isolated. The asymmetry ratio of H/L as determined by hybridization at saturating RNA/DNA inputs showed a gradual decrease. During the period studied (10-90 and 90-160 min post-induction), about 50 and 35%, respectively, of the radioactive RNA consisted of ribosomal RNA transcripts. The decrease in the H/L asymmetry ratio was due predominantly to the appearance and accumulation of L strand transcripts and not to either changes in the quantity of H strand transcripts nor to fluctuation in the rate of rRNA synthesis.    Normal DNA of Bacillus subtilis phage SP15 contains approximately equimolar quantities of dTMP and a hypermodified nucleotide, 5-dihydroxypentyl-dUMP (DHPdUMP). Deoxythymidine (dThd) rescue of phage DNA synthesis in 5-fluorodeoxyuridine (FUdR)-inhibited cultures resulted in the synthesis of SP15 DNA containing enhanced levels of dTMP and correspondingly reduced levels of DHPdUMP. This rescued system was used to probe possible roles of DHPdUMP in phage development. The results suggested that normal levels of DHPdUMP were not required for proper transcription of phage DNA, but normal amounts of DHPdUMP were indispensable for phage assembly and/or DNA maturation. The amount of exogenous dThd required to rescue phage DNA synthesis in FUdR-inhibited cultures was 20-fold higher than the concentration required to rescue cellular replication, whereas the same low concentrations of dThd sufficed to rescue viral and bacterial DNA syntheses in aminopterin-inhibited cultures. Normal SP15 DNA was made in rescued, aminopterin-inhibited cultures. We suggest that FUdR (but not aminopterin) partially suppresses biosynthesis of the hypermodified nucleotide and that there is a barrier to replacement of DHPdUMP by dTMP; therefore, exceptionally large amounts of dThd must be salvaged in FUdR-inhibited cultures to force replacement of the unusual nucleotide by dTMP.    Late-log-phase cells of Bacillus amyloliquefaciens have the unusual capacity to produce extracellular protease for over 60 min in the presence of rifampin or actinomycin D at levels which strongly inhibit incorporation of amino acids into cellular protein. If cells are incubated in the presence of high levels of amino acids for 75 min this capacity is exhausted, but it is retained if the incubation is carried out in low levels of amino acids. Transfer of exhausted cells from high to low concentrations of amino acids results in a progressive recovery of the capacity for rifampin-actinomycin-insensitive protease production. The results seem best explained on the basis of the accumulation of a reserve pool of mRNA for extracellular protease. Measurement of the apparent mRNA pool size over 12 h shows a cyclical rise and fall, and these changes correlate with a periodic variation of the rate of protease production. A working hypothesis is presented to account for these observations in terms of a novel control situation over protease mRNA transcription.    In vitro transcription of SPP1 DNA occurred on only one of the two strands, the same which is predominantly transcribed in SPP1-infected cells. Transcripts were distributed in several size classes. Analysis of elongation kinetics and of size distribution, coupled with hybridization to DNA restriction fragments, showed that some regions of the template have more initiation sites than others; some have none. Some regions were transcribed directly, some were transcribed from initiation sites located in other regions, and one was never transcribed. Several transcription initiation sites on SPP1 DNA are located on EcoRI fragment 1; four to five others are distributed among other fragments. Cutting the DNA with EcoRI did not introduce artifactual initiation sites. In vitro transcription units can be localized and oriented with respect to the EcoRI restriction map of SPP1 DNA.    The peptide antibiotic tyrocidine affects transcription in vitro by interfering with the initiation process. The complex formed between tyrocidine and native DNA is stable against nucleolytic enzymes. It is sensitive to variations in the salt concentration. Protection of DNA as a function of the tyrocidine concentration follows a curve suggesting cooperative binding of tyrocidine to DNA. The complex formation at low tyrocidine concentrations is accompanied by the presence of single stranded regions of unknown length. With single-stranded DNA, tyrocidine forms a complex which is relatively insensitive to high salt concentrations. Both native and single-stranded DNAs of the complexes become digestible in the presence of gramicidin D, another peptide antibiotic. Breakdown of the complex as a function of the gramicidin D concentration follows a curve which is the reverse of cooperative binding. Gramicidin D acts more effectively on single-stranded rather than on double-stranded DNA . tyrocidine complexes. The DNA . tyrocidine complex, which is broken down by formamide and dimethyl sulfoxide is stabilized by gramicidin D. The implications of these results are discussed with respect to a possible recognition of DNA sequences by tyrocidine and the interaction between DNA, tyrocidine and gramicidin D.    The amount of porphobilinogen accumulated by a Bacillus subtilis hemC mutant strain is dependent on time and exogenic aminolevulinic acid addition. hemC mutant seems to be suitable for porphobilinogen production on a large scale.    SPO1 temperature-sensitive mutant ts14-1, located in cistron 31, has a DD (DNA synthesis-delayed) phenotype at 37 degrees C and produces progeny in a stretched program. At 44 degrees C it behaves as a DO (DNA synthesis-defective) mutant and shuts off the viral RNA synthesis about 10 min after infection. The thermal sensitivity of this mutant is due to the inactivity of gp-31 (the product of gene 31) at 44 degrees C. However, gp-31 is synthesized at that temperature and partly recovers its activity at 37 degrees C. Only 5 min at the permissive temperature is enough to trigger the continuation of the phage program and to produce progeny. The partial defect at 37 degrees C and the expansion of the middle program together with the pleiotropic defects at the nonpermissive temperature could be suitable for the study of the controls involved in bacteriophage development.    The left part of the SPP1 chromosome can be defined by the presence of dispensable DNA. With this definition, the polarities of the separable H and L strands of SPP1 DNA ar 5&apos;--3&apos; and 3&apos;--5&apos;, respectively, from left to right.    The transcriptional activity of the two genomes of the sporangium during spore formation was determined by pulse-labeling bacteria with 3H-uracil at different times of sporulation and preparing them for high resolution autoradiography. The quantitative analysis of autoradiographs shows that uracile incorporation in the whole sporangium decreases considerably between stages II and IV. However, the variations of the transcriptional activity are not identical in the mother cell and in the forespore. The one of the mother cell decreases rapidly between stages II and III and then remains stable until the end of stage IV, whereas that of the forespore which is low at stage II increases as the forespore grows ovoid and then quickly diminishes. It is very weak at the beginning of stage IV and negligible at the end of this stage. Pulse-chase experiments made in the presence of rifampine indicate that about 30% of the uracile incorporated is located in stable RNA. This value is found at any stage of sporulation in both cellular compartments whatever their rate of uracile incorporation. A relationship can be made between the nuclear shape and the activity of the genetic material. This confirms observations made by several authors in other bacterial species and other physiological conditions that the condensed shape corresponds to a state of low transcriptional activity whereas the more irregular and dispersed shape corresponds to a state of high activity.    Transcribing Bacillus cereus DNA was visualized by means of autoradiography of electrophoretically separated EcoRI restriction endonuclease DNA fragments hybridizing 32P-labeled RNA. Hybridization of RNA of dormant spores, vegetative cells, and outgrowing spores indicates the following. (i) A large fraction of the nonribosomal RNA in dormant spores is transcribed at a limited number of regions on the bacterial chromosome. (ii) After induction of spore germination, transcription activity is not limited to a single short region on the chromosome, but rather is distributed along the chromosome. The DNA/RNA hybridization technique has been used to identify restriction endonuclease DNA fragments homologous to RNA species that are present in dormant spores but absent from vegetative cells, RNA species that are synthesized immediately after germination induction and are present at a relatively low concentration in vegetative cells, and RNA species that are transcribed at a late stage of outgrowth but are absent or present at low concentration at an early stage of outgrowth.    A protein with a molecular weight of 21,000 daltons is found associated with a fraction of Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase core. This protein (delta) does not react with antibody made against sigma factor and has a peptide map which is significantly different from sigma factor. At ratios of 2:1 to 4:1 (delta:holoenzyme) the delta displaces sigma factor completely from the core and associates in a 1:1 ratio with core to form delta-core. Under the same incubation conditions sigma factor at a ratio of 10:1 (sigma factor:delta-core) does not displace delta from the delta-core. The delta-core has much less activity as compared to holoenzyme on various DNA templates. However, sigma factor does stimulate the activity of delta-core enzyme under conditions of RNA synthesis. These observations and the results of others suggest that delta-core enzyme binds initially to specific DNA sites followed by delta release from the core-DNA complex and that the sigma factor binds to the core-DNA complex to initiate RNA synthesis. Thus both delta and sigma factors are required in a sequential fashion for specific transcription to occur in B subtilis.    DNA-dependent RNA polymerase from Bacillus subtilis contains a 21,000 molecular weight (21K) peptide subunit. This subunit was purified and added to 21K-depleted polymerase isolated from both uninfected and SP85-infected B. subtilis. The effect of the subunit on total RNA synthesis, on enzyme-DNA binding, on RNA chain initiation and elongation, and on enzymatic specificity were examined. A comparison was made of the effects of the 21K peptide and NaCl on polymerase activity, RNA chain elongation, and symmetry of transcription of SP82 DNA. The addition of the 21K peptide to enzyme preparations lacking this subunit stimulated total polymerase activity 20 to 40%. In contrast, addition of NaCl at concentrations greater than 0.1 M significantly reduced polymerase activity. The 21K peptide appeared to alter the general affinity of the polymerase for DNA. The rate of RNA chain initiation was not affected by the 21K peptide, but RNA chain elongation was stimulated. Both the 21K peptide and NaCl increased the asymmetry of transcription of SP82 DNA by phage-modified polymerase. The 21K effect was related to the stimulation of elongation while high concentrations of NCl appeared to act at RNA chain initiation. RNAs synthesized in vitro by polymerase lacking and supplemented with the 21K peptide were translated by a Escherichia coli cell-free system. The 21K peptide had little direct effect on the selection of promoters in vitro as measured by this technique, but it dramatically increased the translatability of the product.    A modified form of Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase containing a phage SP01-coded regulatory protein (the gene 28 product) selectively transcribes &quot;middle&quot; genes of the phage genome in vitro. In this paper, we identify a subset of restriction endonuclease fragments of SP01 DNA that promote specific transcription by the phage-modified polymerase. In the absence of nucleoside triphosphates, RNA polymerase containing the gene 28 protein selectively binds to these DNA fragments thereby forming stable binary complexes that can be isolated on nitrocellulose filters. In contrast, unmodified RNA polymerase containing sigma factor selectively binds to and transcribes a subset of phage DNA fragments that contain &quot;early&quot; sequences and that are in large part distinct from the fragments recognized by the phage-modified transcriptase. Our results strongly suggest that phage &quot;early&quot; and &quot;middle&quot; genes are transcribed from distinct promoters and that the RNA polymerase containing the gene 28 protein binds to sites that are located at or near promoters for SP01 &quot;middle&quot; genes.    The isolation of folded DNA from Bacillus subtilis, a Gram positive bacterium is described. When the lysis was achieved with 1 M NaCl a slow sedimenting nucleoid was obtained (1600-2000 S). Conversely, when the lysis was achieved with 0.2 M NaCl a fast sedimenting nucleoid was obtained (3500-4000 S). The yield of folded DNA was between 80 to 90 % of the total lysate DNA. Both nucleoids contained the same amount of RNA, but the relative proportions of lipids and proteins were different. Folded chromosomes were prepared in the presence of spermidine: artifactual protein binding is shown to be unlikely. Electrophoresis of nucleoid proteins showed a dominant polypeptide (MW = 36,000), which remained associated with DNA after sarcosyl treatment and could be partially removed by heat mediated DNA unfolding. In vitro transcription by endogenous RNA polymerase bound to the fast sedimenting-nucleoid was rifamycin resistant; the template capacity of the fast sedimenting-nucleoid was compared with that of the completely unfolded chromosomes.    Bacillus subtilis phage PBS2 induced the synthesis of two temporally defined categories of phage-specified transcripts. The transcription of phage &quot;early&quot; genes was induced almost immediately after infection; this RNA synthesis did not require phage protein synthesis. Phage &quot;late&quot; gene transcription, on the other hand, was induced at an intermediate time in the lytic cycle; this RNA synthesis required the production of phage proteins. Both classes of transcription were resistant to the drug rifampin and, therefore, apparently did not require the rifampin-sensitive component of the host RNA polymerase. A rifampin-resistant, DNA-dependent RNA polymerase was purified from bacteria infected with PBS2. The highly purified phage polymerase consisted of five distinct subunits that remained associated during zone centrifugation, isoelectric focusing, and disc gel electrophoresis. The synthesis of each of the five polypeptides was induced at an intermediate time in the phage lytic cycle. As judged by hybridization competition, hybridization to DNA restriction fragments, and RNA-RNA annealing, the phage-induced RNA polymerase preferentially and asymmetrically transcribed PBS2 late genes in vitro. These findings suggest that the PBS2 RNA polymerase controls the expression of phage genes late in the lytic cycle.    Functional half-life of the exocellular protease mRNA was determined in in exponentially growing and stationary cells of the asporogenic strain of Bacillus megaterium KM and in the sporogenic strain of B. megaterium 27 during sporulation. No reserve of the protease mRNA could be detected in the cells and the half-lives were determined to be 6--7 min in the exponential and stationary cells of B. megaterium KM and 7.5--8.5 min in B. megaterium 27. The mean half-life of mRNA for cell proteins was determined to be 3.5--4.5 min. Thus, as compared with the mean half-life of mRNA for cell proteins that of mRNA for the exocellular protease is slightly longer.    A composite plasmid (pAT2010) has been constructed in vitro from RSF2124 and Bacillus subtilis IFO3022 plasmid (pAT1060) by covalent joining of the two DNA molecules by means of Escherichia coli DNA ligase through the cohesive ends generated by restriction endonuclease RI (EcoRI) cleavage. The composite plasmid was selected by transformation of E. coliC600r-m- with the ligated mixture after enrichment for composite plasmid by preparative agarose gel electrophoresis, and plating of the transformants on a medium containing ampicillin and colicin E1. Treatment of the composite plasmid with EcoRI yielded two fragments corresponding to the linear forms of the parental plasmids. The composite plasmids replicated as biologically functionally units in E. coli, and expressed genetic information carried by RSF2124. In the presence of chloramphenicol, the composite plasmids continued to replicate and the copy number gradually increased. Such nature of replication in the presence of chloramphenicol is characteristic to RSF2124 derived from colicin E1 factor, and so it is suggested that the replicator of RSF2124 is functional in the composite plasmid. The composite plasmid was found to synthesize mRNA of B. subtilis plasmid in cell-free extracts of E. Coli, by hybridization of the mRNA to the original plasmid DNA of pAT1060.    A phage-induced subunit has been purified from phage SP01-modified Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase. This subunit binds in vitro to RNA polymerase core from uninfected B. subtilis thereby template-selective transcription and asymmetric synthesis of SP01 middle RNA.    Lipiarmycin inhibited the activity of deoxyribonucleic acid-dependent ribonucleic acid (RNA) polymerase in vitro. We showed that inhibition was due to interference by lipiarmycin with the activity of sigma-containing molecules of RNA polymerase. Transcription by core enzyme was relatively resistant to the drug, but addition of sigma led to highly drug-sensitive RNA synthesis. We isolated lipiarmycin-resistant mutants of Bacillus subtilis and characterized them genetically and biochemically. Drug-resistant mutants contained an altered RNA polymerase that was resistant to the drug in vitro. By separation and mixed reconstitution of core and sigma fractions of mutant and wild-type RNA polymerase, we showed that lipiarmycin resistance in one mutant strain was a property of the core fraction. Genetic mapping experiments indicated that at least two lpm mutants are located between loci determining rifampin resistance and streptolydigin resistance.    An endonuclease restriction fragment of Bacillus subtilis DNA has been identified that contains a gene whose transcription is activated early during the process of spore formation. This 4.4 kilobase (kb) DNA was detected by hybridizing electrophoretically separated Eco R1 restriction fragments with a radioactively labeled RNA of 0.4 kb from sporulating cells. The 4.4 kb B. subtilis DNA was then cloned and amplified in E. coli by insertion into the plasmid vector pMB9. Using the cloned B. subtilis DNA as a hybridization probe, we were able to detect the 0.4 kb transcript in total RNA from pulse-labeled bacteria. In wild-type cells, the gene coding for the 0.4 kb RNA was turned on within the first 30 min of spore formation. Although transcribed normally in a mutant blocked at stage II of spore development, the gene for the 0.4 kb RNA was not turned on in six different mutants blocked at stage 0 of sporulation. We conclude that the cloned B. subtilis DNA contains a gene whose transcription is regulated by events occurring at the onset of spore development.    The sporulating bacterial strain Bacillus brevis (ATCC 8185) produces two types of peptide antibiotics, the linear gramicidins and the cyclic tyrocidines. Their effects on transcription in vitro were studied: 1. RNA synthesis catalized by RNA polymerase and DNA as template, both from B. brevis cells, is inhibited by the addition of gramicidin maximally to 50% as compared to controls without gramicidin. This inhibition is dependent on the concentration of gramicidin as well as on that of RNA polymerase. 2. Transcription of DNA is also inhibited by tyrocidine. This inhibition is partially compensated by the addition of gramicidin. Here, the action of gramicidin is again dependent on its concentration and on that of RNA polymerase. 3. This counteraction of gramicidin occurs only with RNA polymerase from B. brevis. Enzyme preparations of other origin are additively inhibited by gramicidin when previously inhibited by tyrocidine. The specific action pattern of gramicidin and tyrocidine in connection with the B. brevis RNA polymerase supports the notion that the two peptide antibiotics may be involved in a gene regulatory mechanism during sporogenesis.    The interaction of the phage SPO1 protein transcription factor 1 (TF1), with DNA has been analyzed by membrane filter binding and by sedimentation methods. Substantially specific binding of TF1 to helical SPO1 DNA can be demonstrated by nitrocellulose filter-binding assays at relatively low ionic strength (0.08). However, TF1-DNA complexes dissociate and reequilibrate relatively rapidly and this makes filter-binding assays unsuitable for quantitative measurements of binding equilibra. Accordingly, the sedimentation properties of TF1-DNA complexes have been explored and a short-column centrifugation assay has been elaborated for quantitative measurements. Preferential binding of TF1 to the hydroxymethyluracil-containing SPO1 DNA has also been demonstrated by short-column centrifugation. TF1 binds relatively weakly and somewhat cooperatively to SPO1 DNA at many sites; TF1-DNA complexes dissociate and reequilibrate rapidly. At 20 degrees C in 0.01 M phosphate, pH 7.5, 0.15 KC1, one molecule of TF1 can bind to approximately every 60 nucleotide pairs of SPO1 DNA.    This paper describes a novel biochemical effect of gramicidin, a class of peptide antibiotics produced by Bacillus brevis during the transition from vegetative growth to sporulation. Gramicidin inhibits RNA synthesis by purified RNA polymerase (nucleosidetriphosphate:RNA nucleotidyl-transferase, EC 2.7.7.6) by interfering with the binding of RNA polymerase to DNA. This effect seems to involve the destabilization of the &quot;open&quot; RNA polymerase-DNA complex, a mode of action consistent with the control of promoter selection. Selectivity in the inhibition of RNA synthesis by gramicidin is observed when transcription is partially blocked by low levels of actinomycin D. Since the inhibition of RNA synthesis by gramicidin is obtained in a highly purified system devoid of membranes, it must be distinct from the ionophoretic activity of the antibiotic. It is possible that this new mode of action reflects the function of gramicidin during bacterial sporulation.    Bacillus subtilis delta protein is a 21 500-Mr polypeptide that can be isolated in association with RNA polymerase holoenzyme from uninfected bacteria and with modified forms of RNA polymerase from cells infected with phage SP01 [Pero, J., Nelson, J. and Fox, T. (1975) Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 72,1589]. Although no function has been assigned to delta protein in uninfected cells, this host polypeptide enhances the specificity of transcription by phage-modified forms of RNA polymerase that contain SP01-coded regulatory subunits. This report describes the purification of delta and sigma proteins from uninfected B. subtilis and examines the comparative effects of these polypeptides on transcription by core RNA polymerase. Purified sigma polypeptide was found to stimulate the transcription of phage DNA while having little effect on RNA synthesis with the synthetic DNA poly(dA-dT) as template. In contrast, purified delta protein markedly depressed the transcription of poly(dA-dT) while having little effect on enzyme activity with phage DNA as template. The inhibitory effect of delta protein on poly (dA-dT) transcription was strongly dependent on the presence of KC1 in the RNA synthesis reaction mixture.    A new procedure for the purification of B. subtilis RNA polymerase, based on mild lysis of cells, low speed centrifugation, gel filtration, DEAE-Sephadex chromatography and affinity chromatography on DNA-cellulose, yields three forms of enzyme referred here as enzyme A, B and C. As revealed by SDS gel electrophoresis, enzyme A has the subunit structure of core polymerase plus some small polypeptides. Its catalytic properties are similar to those of core polymerase. Enzyme B has the composition of core polymerase. Both enzymes A and B can be stimulated by the addition of beta factor. Enzyme C has the holo-enzyme composition. The pattern of sensitivity of the three forms of enzyme towards KCl are very different: enzymes A and B, even at low concentration of salt, are inhibited with all the DNA templates tested, whereas enzyme C shows a pattern of stimulation specific for each DNA tested. The transcripts of the three enzymes on phage SPP1 DNA template have been analyzed by hybridization to the separated strands. Only enzyme C selectively transcribed the H strands.    Bacillus subtilis W23 was infected with bacteriophage SP-15. Two waves of phage-specific RNA synthesis were observed. Wave I was prereplicative, and wave II was coincident with replication of the viral genome. To determine the temporal appearance of general classes of phage-coded messengers and proteins, we studied the dependence of lysozyme synthesis, phage production, and DNA synthesis on time of addition of transcriptional and translational inhibitors. Lysozyme synthesis started to become refractile to a variety of transcriptional inhibitors (rifampin, streptolydigin, and actinomycin D) between 20 and 22 min postinfection and was completely refractile by 30 min. Nevertheless, functional enzyme did not appear until 45 to 47 min postinfection; lysozyme was maximal by 65 min. Rna isolated from SP-15 phage-infected cells was used to program the cell-free synthesis of lysozyme. The messenger was synthesized exclusively between 20 and 30 min postinfection. Lysozyme messengers were stable. The data imply that lysozyme messengers were present 52 min prior to their translation. Progeny virus formation remained sensitive to transcriptional inhibitors until 40 to 50 min postinfection, and sensitivity to chloramphenicol lasted 65 min. The first progeny viruses appeared at 75 min. Again, an unusually long lag between completion of functional messengers and their translation was evident. The aforementioned data indicated that transcription of lysozyme messengers and, at least, some messengers, whose products are essential for phage production, are uniquely associated with waves I and II of RNA synthesis, respectively. However, messengers whose products are essential for normal amounts of DNA synthesis were apparently synthesized during both waves; transcription of these messengers was transiently repressed (using the term broadly) between 30 and 40 min postinfection. Judging from the dependence of DNA synthesis on time of chloramphenicol addition, proteins essential for normal amounts of DNA synthesis were also synthesized in two discrete waves, each yielding sufficient protein for half-maximal levels of DNA synthesis. An hiatus in the synthesis of the proteins in question was evident between 45 and 65 min postinfection; evidence cited in this paper indicates that this hiatus did not result from messenger depletion, which, in turn, implied some type of translational-level control. This latter conclusion is substantiated by the lysozyme synthesis that occurred during the same interval when synthesis of certain proteins for DNA replication was transiently repressed.    The analysis of the transcriptional mechanism of the ribosomal RNA genes in Bacillus subtilis was undertaken by a study of the rRNA chain elongation in the presence of rifampicin. The residual RNA synthesis after the addition of rifampicin and [3H] uridine to exponentially growing cells has shown that 56% of the radioactivity incorporated into total RNA belongs to the unstable fraction and 44% to the fraction containing mature rRNA and tRNA. Such study allowed an estimation of the half-life of messenger RNAs as being approximately 2 min. The analysis of the transcription pattern of the ribosomal RNA genes, as measured by the amount of radioactivity found in the ribosomal subunits, was complicated by a contamination of the 30 S subunits by 50 S subunits. A contamination of approximately 15% was estimated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and competitive hybridization. The ratios of incorporated radioactivity at zero time when drug and label were concomitantly added ranged between 5.4-6.0, after correction for this contamination. The decay of the 23 S rRNA followed a straight line which became parabolic in its final portion. These results, and theoretical considerations on the lag of rifampicin action and on the variance of the specific activity of the nucleotide pool at the very early times of the experimental observation, favor the interpretation that the 16 and 23 S rRNA genes in B. subtilis belong to the same transcriptional unit, being cotranscribed, in that order, by the same molecule of RNA polymerase. The transcriptional times of the 16 and 23 S rRNA genes were estimated as being 30 and 60 s, respectively.    By the use of a rapid radioautographic screening procedure, two mutants of Bacillus brevis ATCC 8185 that have lost the ability to produce gramicidin have been isolated. These mutants produced normal levels of tyrocidine and sporulated at the same frequency as the parent strain. Their spores, however, were more heat-sensitive and had a reduced dipicolinic acid content. Gramicidin-producing revertants occurred at a relatively high frequency among the survivors of prolonged heat treatment and had also regained the ability to produce heat-resistant spores. A normal sport phenotype could also be restored by the addition of gramicidin to cultures of the mutant strain at the end of the exponential growth. On the other hand, the addition of dipicolinic acid could not cure the spore defect. These results provide strong evidence that the inability to produce gramicidin is directly responsible for the observed spore defects. Indeed, they unambiguously demonstrate a function of a peptide antibiotic in bacterial sporulation. The possibility that this function consists of the regulation of transcription during the transition from growth to sporulation is discussed.    A single site mutant of Bacillus subtilis with a streptovaricin-resistant RNA polymerase has been isolated; this mutation caused temperature-sensitive sporulation, but had no effect on vegetative growth. The mutant (ts710) temperature-sensitive period irreversibly affected the middle and late stages of sporulation. Mutant cells grown at the nonpermissive temperature exhibited abnormal serine protease accumulation, serine esterase accumulation, alkaline phosphatase accumulation, RNA polymerase template specificity changes, and pulse-labeled RNA synthesis profiles. The accumulation of metal protease was not affected at the nonpermissive temperature. Attempts to isolate single site mutants which were streptolydigin-resistant, and temperature-sensitive for sporulation, were unsuccessful.    The interaction of granaticin B, a quinone antibiotic produced by Streptomyces granaticolor, with some biologically important bivalent metal ions, DNA and ATP was demonstrated spectrophotometrically. The activity of isolated RNA polymerase was higher when the DNA of phage SP 50 served as template than with DNA isolated from Bacillus subtilis. Granaticin B inhibited in vitro RNA synthesis, similarly to certain other antibiotics (the inhibition was three times lower than that caused by actinomycin D or streptolydigin and slightly higher than that by epsilon-pyrromycinone). The inhibitory effect was higher when the Mg2+ concentration in the reaction mixture was decreased. The inhibition was then proportional to the concentration of the DNA template. DNA-dependent RNA synthesis is thus inhibited in vitro by granaticin B but this does not appear to be the only site of action of this antibiotic in vivo.    Rifampin-resistant mutants of Bacillus subtilis that are conditionally temperature sensitive during sporulation have been isolated and characterized. The mutants can grow at the same rate as the wild type at the nonpermissive temperature but cannot sporulate. Depending on the mutation, they are blocked at either stage 0 to I, II, II to III, or IV of sporulation. The mutants showed an altered pattern of RNA synthesis after the stage at which they were blocked. The effect of rifampin on the activity of enzymes from mutant vegetative cells and sporulating cells was significantly different, suggesting that the RNA polymerase from sporulating cells was different from the RNA polymerase of vegetative cells. These results suggest that the conformation of the RNA polymerase core plays an important role in determining correct transcription during sporulation.    EcoRI fragments A, B and C produced from linear phi29 DNA, but not D or E fragments, are transcribed by purified Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase. The transcription of fragments A and C is initiated preferentially with GTP and to a lesser extent with ATP; the reverse happens in the case of fragment B. The dinucleotides GpU and GpA respectively, compete specifically with the incorporation of [gamma-32P]GTP directed by fragments A and C. The RNA synthesized in vitro by purified B. subtilis RNA polymerase is highly asymmetric. Most of the RNA synthesis directed by fragments A and C is early RNA. However, most of the RNA produced by fragment B is anti-late-RNA. Addition of crude extracts inhibit the transcription of fragment B but not that of fragments A and C.    Recent studies of the structure of the bacterial nucleoid are reviewed. In the past 4 to 5 years results of electron microscopic and physical-chemical investigations of the isolated bacterial nucleoids have greatly advanced our understanding of this comparatively simple chromosome. Evidence for both long-range and short-range conformational organization of the packaged DNA has emerged, and preliminary characterization of the molecular interactions organizing this structure has been accomplished.    Two polypeptides named FI and FII were isolated from vegetative cells of Bacillus subtilis Marburg. The molecular weights of FI and FII were 15,000 and 30,000 daltons, respectively. They were able to stimulate the transcription of phage M2 DNA in the presence of Mg2+ ions by RPase L1 and RPase L2 [RNA polymerase; EC 2.7.7.6]. Although both core- and holo-RPase L2 hardly exhibited transcription activity under these conditions, the factors could stimulate both activities up to the level of RPase L1 activity. The stimulation was much less marked when B. subtilis DNA was used as a template. These stimulatory functions were found to lie not in the chain elongation but in the initiation step of transcription, following the preinitiation step. To obtain stimulation by the factors, preincubation with RNA polymerase was necessary. FI stimulated RPase L1 or RPase L2 only when preincubated in the stimultaneous presence of FII, forming a complex, RPase L1(or L2)-FI-FII. On the other hand, FII alone could stimulate transcription, forming a complex. RPase L1 (or L2)-FII. In these complexes, the ratio of FI, FII, and RPase L1(or L2) was 1 : 1: 1. Although the core-RPase L2 activity was inhibited by sigma subunits, it was not inhibited by was rather stimulated when the enzyme was present as a complex with FI and FII. Thus the complex, consisting of RPase L2 and the factors, resembled RPase L1 with respect to molecular weight, template specificity, the effect of sigma subunit, and sensitivity to rifampicin.    Two forms of RNA polymerase [EC 2.7.7.6], RPase L1 and RPase L2, isolated from a highly synchronized vegetative culture of Bacillus subtilis Marburg strain are described. RPase L1 is the major component (identical and the vegetative RNA polymerase already reported) and RPase L2 is a minor, new component corresponding to 3--5% of the total activity. The enzymes differed in their requirements for divalent ions, though the differences depended on the template DNA employed. PRase L1 is able to transcribe phage M2 DNA in the presence of Mg2+ ions and both B. subtilis DNA and phage M2 DNA in the presence of Mn2+ ions. On the other hand, RPase L2 activity can be detected only in the presence of 3 mM Mn2+ ions with all the templates. It is of interest that the transcription of phage M2 DNA by both enzymes stringently requires KC1. It may be due to this ion dependence that RPase L2 has not been detected previously. RPase L2 consists of 1beta&apos;, 1beta gamma, 1sigma, and 2alpha subunits. The molecular weight of the beta gamma subunit (about 110,000) is close to the value reported for the beta subunit of RNA polymerase prepared from sporulating cells. However, RPase L2 as a whole molecule is different from the RNA polymerase of sporulating cells or spores in the following two respects: RPase L2 contains sigma subunit as a component essential for selective transcription, and it is resistant to 1 mug of rifampicin per ml. Elimination of the sigma subunit from RPase L2 greatly stimulates RNA synthesis by the enzyme. Conversely, the addition of sigma subunit to the core-enzyme is inhibitory.    Netropsin, a polypeptide antibiotic which binds specifically to adenylate-thymidylate-rich regions of deoxyribonucleic acid, inhibitis sporulation at about stage II, but does not inhibit growth of Bacillys subtilis. An analysis of the sporulation-associated enzymes aconitase, alkaline phosphatase, and glucose dehydrogenase revealed that their rates of expression were not affected by the presence of the antibiotic. The derepression of histidase, a vegetatively induced enzyme was stimulated by netropsin. Oxygen utilization by the cells during sporulation was not effected nor was spore germination prevented by the drug. Netropsin, however, did prevent the formation of dipicolinic acid. These and earlier results suggest that netropsin may be affecting the transcription of only select sporulation genes that are particularly rich in adenylate-thymidylate base pairs.    The effect of tryptophan on the synthesis of histidinol phosphate aminotransferase and prephenate dehydrogenase has been examined. The genes specifying two enzymes for tryptophan biosynthesis (anthranilate synthase and tryptophan synthase-B) were found to be derepressed in a temporal sequence according to their chromosomal location. The genes for histidinol phosphate aminotransferase and prephenate dehydrogenase were derepressed simultaneously approximately 8 min after tryptophan synthase-B. When excess tryptophan was added to a derepressed culture, the pattern of repression of trpE (anthranilate synthase), trpB (tryptophan synthase-B), hisH (histidinol phosphate aminotransferase), and tyrA (prephenate dehydrogenase) was found to be simultaneous. Methyl tryptophan-resistant mutants, which synthesize elevated levels of the tryptophan enzymes, also synthesized elevated levels of histidinol phosphate aminotransferase. Qualitatively similar data were obtained in a temperature-sensitive tryptophanyl-transferase ribonucleic acid synthetase mutant grown at elevated temperatures. The time at which messenger ribonucleic acid was synthesized for anthranilate synthase, tryptophan synthase-B, histidinol phosphate aminotransferase, and prephenate dehydrogenase in the presence of actinomycin D indicated that ordered enzyme synthesis was a result of ordered transcription of the corresponding portion of the genome. The effect of the drug rifampin on enzyme synthesis was also examined. The addition of this drug halted the transcription of anthranilate synthase very rapidly, but later regions of the tryptophan region continued to be transcribed. The transcription of the hisH and tyrA genes was also shut off rapidly after rifampin was added. The significance of these observations to the control of transcription of the hisH gene by tryptophan is discussed.    E. coli fMet-tRNAfMEet and E. coli RNA plymerase (RNA nucleotidyltransferase; EC 2.7.7.6; nucleoside-triphosphate:RNA nucleotidyltransferase) form a 1:1 complex with an apparent association constant of 9.0 X 10(6)M-1 at 37 degrees. The affinity of polymerase to tRNA depends on the tRNA as well as the formyl methionine moiety. Core polymerase has a greatly reduced affinity for initiator tRNA. Optimal binding conditions are similar to those that are also optimal for binding initiator tRNA to ribosomes. Binding of initiator tRNA to polymerase stimulates the transcription of lambda plac DNA, as determined in a crude cell-free system for beta-galactosidase (EC 3.2.1.23; beta-D-galactoside galactohydrolase) synthesis as well as in a highly purified transcription system.    The DNA of the Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage SP82 has been separated into heavy (H) and light (L) fractions by centrifugation in buoyant density gradients in the presence of polyguanylic acid. Competition-hybridization experiments were performed with these separated fractions using RNAs isolated from cells labeled at intervals which account for 80% of the lytic cycle and unlabeled competitor RNAs isolated from phage-infected cells at 2-min intervals throughout infection. The analysis of temporal RNA classes were facilitated by use of a double reciprocal plot of the data. Five temporal classes binding to the H fraction and three binding to the L fraction were detected; the possible existence of an additional class transcribed from the H fraction is discussed. RNA synthesized in the presence of chloramphenicol contains two of the three classes produced from L-DNA and two of the five classes transcribed from H-DNA.    A Bacillus subtilis temperature-sensitive mutant (PB1653) has been isolated in which the rate of ribonucleic acid (RNA) synthesis sharply decreases after shift to 45 degrees C. Both stable and unstable RNAs are affected by the mutation. The possibility that the block of transcription at high temperature could be due to a &quot;stringent&quot; effect, mediated by an increase in the concentration of &quot;magic spot&quot; nucleotides, has been ruled out. Treatment with chloramphenicol (or streptomycin) rapidly restores the rate of RNA synthesis at 45 degrees C. The synthesis of RNA in the mutant during the early phases of spore germination is not temperature sensitive. The phage-specific transcription during infection with SPP1 phage, at high temperature, is less affected than that of the bacterial chromosome. In vitro experiments indicate that, in the mutant at high temperature, RNA polymerase undergoes a change in template specificity. The rna-53 mutation has been located on the B. subtilis genetic map near the hisA locus.    The phage SPO1-modified RNA polymerase B-P can form rapidly initiating complexes with SPO1 DNA but not with heterologous phi1 DNA. The B-P enzyme binds only weakly to heterologous phi29 DNA: preincubation with phi29 DNA does not substantially slow the formation of rapidly initiating complexes between polymerase B-P and subsequently added SPO1 DNA. In contrast, B. subtilis holoenzyme and core polymerase are substantially sequestered by preincubation with phi29 DNA. The results show that at least one of the phage SPO1-coded subunits of the polymerase B-P determines selective transcription at the level of DNA binding and RNA chain initiation, weakens the binding of RNA polymerase core to heterologous DNA, and discriminates against promoter complex formation at certain promoters that are utilized by the B. subtilis holoenzyme.    The complete nucleotide sequence of a 179-nucleotide precursor (p5A) of 5 S ribosomal RNA from Bacillus subtilis is presented. In addition to the 116-nucleotide mature segment, the p5A molecule contains 21 additional nucleotides at its 5&apos; end and 42 at its 3&apos; terminus. Structural features within the p5A molecule which possibly interact with a specific maturation endonuclease (RNase M5) are identifiable. These include 2-fold rotational symmetry about the cleavage sites, which may approximately place the p5A molecule on the RNase M5 surface, and translational (positional) symmetry, which may precisely orient substrate phosphodiester bonds with respect to catalytic amino acids. Certain features of the 3&apos; -terminal, precursor-specific portion of p5A possibly are involved in the termination of DNA transcription.    Two temperature-sensitive sporulation mutants have been characterized. One mutant, which is blocked at stage II, has a short temperature-sensitive period that occurs at about the time when the spore septum is formed. Cells can escape the sporulation block, if incubated for a short period at the permissive temperature, but are prevented from doing so by inhibitors of transcription and translation; this suggests that the product of the defective gene is a protein and that the messenger ribonucleic acid which codes for this protein is short-lived. The other mutant is blocked at stage IV to V and has a long temperature-sensitive period that starts during stage III and precedes the stage at which the mutational defect is phenotypically expressed. The behavior of this mutant in temperature-shift experiments suggests that synthesis of the product of the defective gene commences long before it assumes its physiological function.    1. S-100 fractions from E. coli - harvested under conditions of balanced growth - exhibit considerably higher total tRNA methyltransferase activities when the cells were grown in broth or amino acid enriched media than in glucose-salt medium. The results suggest that the expression of tRNA methyltransferase activities is correlated with the growth rate. Since in bacteria the RNA polymerase is always present in excess the rate of transcription relative to the level of modifying enzymes might influence the relative occurrence of isogenetic submodified tRNAs in a cell. 2. The release of the stringent response in bacteria causes the accumulation of isoaccepting species of tRNAPhe, tRNATyr and tRNALeu. This is relevant in rel- strains of E. coli upon deprival of an essential amino acid or in stringently controlled E. coli or B. subtilis upon treatment with chloramphenicol or pactamycin. We suggest that isoaccepting species of tRNAs are intermediate in the biosynthetic pathway of tRNA. Whether they exhibit as yet unknown regulatory functions during the cell cycle has to be elucidated in future experiments. 3. In B. subtilis the release of the stringent response by inhibitors of the ribosome causes a decrease in the ratio of CH3-/uridine labelling for total tRNAs and rRNAs relative to a corresponding control. Several species of tRNAs from treated cells accepted methylgroups in an invitro system preferentially at guanine-residues. B. subtilis tRNAs do not contain m5U in considerable amounts. With heterologous E. coli enzymes U residues in submethylated tRNAs from pactamycin treated cells are converted to m5U to the same relative frequency as in E. coli tRNAs. It is therefore assumed that B. subtilis tRNAs contain an uracil residue instead of ribothymidine. 4. B. subtilis tRNAs from cells of the early log phase lack a specific as yet unidentified base, characteristic for stationary phase cultures. It is possible that a specific tRNA methyltransferase is expressed or derepressed during the differentiation of vegetative cells to spores.    An improved, reproducible and easy technique for the reconstitution of active DNA-dependent RNA polymerase from pure separate subunits is described. It has been used for a study of the mechanisms of reconstitution. It has revealed the existence of a beta alpha2-complex and the requirements of beta&apos; for the binding of factor sigma. More evidence on the interaction of subunits with each other has been obtained by identification of RNA polymerase fragments. The technique of mixed reconstitution has been used for the appointment of the tsX mutation in E. coli T16 to the beta&apos; gene. Phage T4-induced alteration and modification result in identical changes of the alpha-subunit. The sequence of the modified tryptic alpha-peptide has been determined. An alteration of the alpha-subunit different from the T4-induced modification has been found in the stationary phase of E. coli grown in phosphate deficient medium. After infection of E. coli with bacteriophage T7 the beta&apos; subunit is phosphorylated by a T7-gene-dependent protein phosphokinase. No modification of RNA polymerase subunits has been observed during sporulation of B. cereus.    The present paper describes an investigation, at the transcription level, in a thermosensitive sporulation mutant of Bacillus subtilis (ts-4) grown at the permissive (30 degrees C) or restrictive (42 degrees C) temperature where sporulation capacity is respectively expressed or arrested. These studies were carried out by analysing the ribonucleic acid from vegetative and stationary phase cells (t3 cells) grown under both conditions, by hybridization-competition experiments.    The Bacillus subtilis phage 2C contains one molecule of double-stranded DNA of about 100 x 10(6) daltons in which thymine is replaced by hydroxymethyluracil; the two strands have different buoyant densities. Parental DNA, labeled with either [3H]uracil of [32P]phosphate, was quite effectively transferred to offspring phage, and the efficiency of transfer was the same for the two strands. Labeled nucleotide compositions of the H and L strands from parental and progeny virions were very close. These data exclude a degradation of the infecting DNA and reutilization of nucleotides. Upon infection of light unlabeled cells with heavy radioactive viruses, no DNA with either heavy or hybrid density was extracted from offspring phage. Instead, an heterogeneous population of DNA molecules of densities ranging from that of almost hybrid to that of fully light species was obtained. Shear degradation of such progeny DNA to fragments of decreasing molecular weight produced a progressive shift to the density of hybrid molecules. Denaturation of sheared DNA segments caused the appearance of labeled and heavy single-stranded segments. These findings indicate that 2C DNA replicates semiconservatively and then undergoes extensive genetic recombination with newly formed viral DNA molecules within the vegatative pool, thus mimicking a dispersive transfer of the infecting viral genome. The pieces of transferred parental DNA have an average size of 10 x 10(6) daltons.    Synthesis of enzymes functional in the synthesis of nucleotide precursors of peptidoglycan ceases upon initiation of sporulation in Bacillus sphaericus. During sporulation, two periods of synthesis of these enzymes occur. The first starts at spore septum formation and is conincident with forespore engulfment; it involves the synthesis of those enzymes required for making the precursor of vegetative-type peptidoglycan, including L-lysyl ligase but no mesodiaminopimelyl ligase. The second period occurs shortly before the appearance of cortex. It involves the synthesis of diaminopimelyl ligase and the other enzymes needed for making the precursor of cortical peptidoglycan, but not lysyl ligase. Both events are a consequence of derepression at the level of transcription. Neither period of synthesis occurs in asporogenous mutants whose morphological block is at the point of spore septum formation.    1. Exogenous edeine inhibits the synthesis of DNA and protein, but not that of RNA, in extracts of edeine-producing Bacillus brevis Vm 4 cells. This is analogous to the effect of edeine on extracts obtained from edeine-sensitive cells. 2. Producer cells, in contrast to sensitive ones, are not permeable to exogenous edeine. DNA synthesis in producer cells rendered permeable by toluene treatment becomes sensitive to edeine. 3. No free edeine could be detected in post-log producer cells during maximal synthesis of edeine. Nascent edeine exists in the cell in a biologically inactive form, bound to a fast-sedimenting fraction. Edeine B, identical to the antibiotic present in the medium, is released from this fraction by mild treatment with alkali.    Ribonucleic acid polymerase activity in partially purified extract of cells of Bacillus subtilis harvested at different times (t-1, to, t1, and t2) was studied by zone centrifugation. During the course of sporulation, vegetative sigma-factor activity decreased and the transcription complex lost some of its affinity for active sigma factor. The complex underwent a two-stage change in sedimentation value, from 14.5S in vegetative growth phase to a 13S species very early in sporulation to a 16S species at later times. Two SpoO mutants have been studied by zone centrifugation. One strain, a rifampin-resistant (RfmR) mutant, failed to show any modification of the transcription complex, whereas the other, a Rfms strain, underwent a partial evolution of the transcription complex after to.    Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase holoenzyme consists of the subunits beta&apos;, beta, sigma, alpha, delta, and omega. In sporulating bacteria and in bacteria infected with phages SP01 and SP82, this enzyme undergoes changes in subunit composition and transcriptional specificity that could play a regulatory role in gene transcription. Sporulating bacteria may contain a specific component that inhibits the activity of the sigma subunit of polymerase probably by interfering with the binding of sigma-polypeptide to core enzyme. The hypothetical inhibitor may be metabolically unstable, since its activity is rapidly depleted from sporulating cells in the presence of chloramphenicol. Inhibition of sigma-polypeptide activity may restrict the transcription of phage DNA an infected sporulating cells. Although lacking the sigma-subunit, RNA polymerase purified from sporulating cells contains sporulation-specific subunits of 85,000 and 27,000 daltons. In SP01-infected bacteria, the sigma-subunit is replaced by phage-induced subunits. Purified enzyme containing the protein product of SP01 regulatory gene 28 directs the transcription of phage middle genes in vitro, while enzyme containing phage-induced polypeptides V and VI preferentially copies late genes. Accurate transcription of middle and late genes in vitro requires the host delta-subunit of polymerase (or high ionic strength) but not sigma-subunit. Phage PBS2 induces an entirely new multisubunit RNA polymerase that specifically transcribes PBS2 DNA in vitro. This enzyme is synthesized de novo after infection and does not arise by modification of the B. subtilis holoenzyme.    A new form of DNA-dependent RNA polymerase termed enzyme III has been purified from sporulating cells of Bacillus subtilis. In addition to the subunits of core RNA polymerase (beta&apos;, beta, alpha, and omega), enzyme III contains sporulation-specific polypeptides of 85,000 (P85) and 27,000 (P27) daltons. P85 corresponds to an RNA polymerase-binding protein previously identified by precipitation of RNA polymerase from crude extracts of sporulating cells with antibody directed against core enzyme. Both P85 and P27 co-purified with RNA polymerase highly purified by gel filtration, DEAE-cellulose chromatography, phosphocellulose chromatography, and glycerol gradient centrifugation. Enzyme III bound more tightly to phosphocellulose and sedimented more rapidly during zone centrifugation than did RNA polymerase lacking the sporulation polypeptides. RNA polymerase containing P85 and P27 transcribed B. subtilis DNA about 4.5 times more actively than did core RNA polymerase, although both enzymes exhibited similar activities with poly(dA-dT) and phage phie DNA as templates. Enzyme III and core RNA polymerase also differed in their response to increasing concentrations of Mg2+ and KCl.    RNA polymerase (nucleosidetriphosphate: RNA nucleotidyltransferase, EC 2.7.7.6) was purified from rifampicin-resistant Bacillus subtilis, from both uninfected cells and cells infected with bacteriophage SP01. The enzyme from infected cells lacked all traces of the sigma subunit, contained several polypeptides absent from the enzyme made in uninfected cells, and had an altered template specificity in a transcription assay. A cell-free protein synthesizing system from Escherichia coli, when poisoned with rifampicin, was completely dependent on addition of either of these RNA polymerase preparations for DNA-dependent protein synthesis. Under these conditions, the SP01-modified RNA polymerase preferentially stimulated the synthesis of functional mRNA for the phage enzyme dCMP deaminase (deoxycytidylate aminohydrolase, EC 3.5.4.12), whereas unmodified B. subtilis RNA polymerase could stimulate synthesis of this mRNA in small quantity and only after prolonged incubation. This mRNA belongs to a class of phage transcripts (m) which cannot be transcribed in vivo in the absence of phage-specific protein synthesis.    Antibody directed against rho factor from vegetative Bacillus subtilis was prepared by immunizing a rabbit with denaturated rho polypeptide isolated by electrophoresis of partially purified DNA-dependent RNA polymerase on a sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide slab gel. Antiserum to rho reacted specifically with native rho polypeptide but not with core RNA polymerase as judged by complement fixation and by an immunodiffusion assay. Anti-rho antibody also inhibited the ability of rho to stimulate transcription of phage phie DNA but failed to inhibit transcription of poly(dA-dT) by core enzyme. Specific antibody was also raised against a mixture of the beta and beta&apos; subunits of RNA polymerase purified by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The effect of the anti-rho gamma-globulin on the transcription of phage phie DNA by RNA polymerase in crude extracts of vegetative and sporulating cells was examined. Anti-rho antibody markedly inhibited the transcription of phage DNA by RNA polymerase partially purified from vegetative bacteria by ammonium sulfate fractionation but had little effect on transcription of the phage DNA template by enzyme from sporulating cells. Addition of purified rho to a vegetative extract that had been depleted of rho by treatment with the anti-rho antibody restored active transcription of phage DNA. However, addition of purified rho to an antibody-treated extract of sporulating cells had little effect on phie RNA synthesis. These findings suggest that sporulating cells contain a component that interferes with the activity of the rho subunit of RNA polymerase.    1. The cyclic peptide antibiotic tyrocidine which inhibits RNA synthesis in vitro by forming a complex with the DNA (Schazschneider, B., Ristow, H. and Kleinkauf, H. (1974) Nature 249, 757-759) induces hypochromicity of the DNA. The complex dissociates at elevated temperatures but which are below the melting temperature of the DNA. 2. The linear peptide antibiotic gramicidin which reverses the inhibitory effect of tyrocidine (Ristow, H., Schazschneider, B., Bauer, K. and Kleinkauf, H. (1975) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 390, 246-252) does not bind to DNA and does not induce hypochromicity of the DNA. However, the DNA-tyrocidine complex dissociates at lower temperatures when gramicidin is present. Thus gramicidin weakens the binding of tyrocidine to DNA. 3. The presence of DNA quenches the fluorescence of tyrocidine but not that of gramicidin. This quenching of tyrocidine fluorescence is reduced in the presence of gramicidin. 4. Tyrocidine inhibits transcription of single-stranded DNA as well. This inhibition too can be reversed by gramicidin. Thus the action of the peptides is not dependent on a double-stranded DNA conformation.    Four phage phi29 suppressor-sensitive mutants of cistron O have been examined for production of 14C-labeled viral-specific proteins in restrictive infections of Bacillus subtilis and fail to produce the protein of the viral neck lower collar. Cistrons O and F have been placed on the genetic map, containing 12 cistrons, by three-factor crosses. The phenotypes of five cistron J mutants have been analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate gel electrophoresis and autoradiography, and in three instances fragments of the normal polypeptide were detected. Three factor crosses with these mutants and a virus with a clear plaque phenotype were used to initiate the mapping of cistron J and the determination of the orientation of transcription in this map region.    Nucleic acid synthesis was studied during germination and outgrowth of normal spores of Bacillus subtilis, as well as of spores carrying the genome of phage phie. In a system in which development was restricted to the spore-darkening phase, synthesis of ribonucleic acid (RNA), but not deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), was detected. The extent of RNA synthesis and turnover, during this phase was similar for the two types of spores. In a partially darkened population of spores of either type, there was little RNA degradation, whereas there was considerable turnover in a fully darkened population. The DNA-dependent RNA polymerase of dormant or dark spores was not active in vitro with phi DNA as template, although a sigma-like factor could be separated from the polymerizing activity by zone centrifugation. Within 40 min after resuspension of dark spores in a medium that allows outgrowth, the enzyme acquired the ability to transcribe the phage DNA efficiently. During outgrowth, both normal and carrier spores synthesized DNA, but in carrier spores this DNA was almost entirely phage specific. The pattern of RNA accumulation in normal spores was in two distinct phase (0 to 60 min and 90 to 180 min). The second phase was absent in outgrowing carrier spores. The burst of phage in carrier spores occurred at 160 to 180 min.    A purification procedure for RNA polymerase from uninfected and phage SP01-infected Bacillus subtilis is presented. The RNA polymerase purified from B. subtilis 10 min after infection with wild type phage SP01 is resolved into two major fractions (B, C) and one minor fraction (A) by calf thymus DNA-cellulose chromatography. Fraction C is indistinguishable from RNA polymerase from uninfected cells with respect to transcription specificity (both before and after phosphocellulose chromatography). Fraction B yields, on subsequent phosphocellulose chromatography, an enzyme (B-P) whose properties distinguish it from the host RNA polymerase. Enzyme B-P preferentially transcribes SP01 DNA and selectively forms rapidly initiating complexes with SP01 DNA but not with heterologous DNA. The SP01 RNA synthesized by Enzyme B-P includes, as previously reported, a large proportion of asymmetrical middle viral RNA. Host RNA polymerase holoenzyme synthesizes asymmetrical early viral RNA, while host core polymerase synthesizes symmetrical RNA that is complementary to early, middle, and late in vivo viral RNA and contains a preponderance of antimessenger. The subunit composition of Enzyme B-P is identical to host core polymerase with respect to the beta,beta&apos;, and alpha subunits and two additional components of mr equals 9,500 and 11,000 that we observe in all preparations of RNA polymerase. In addition, Enzyme B-P has two subunits of mr equals 13,000 and 28,000, which are synthesized after phage infection. On heterologous template, Enzyme B-P and host core polymerase have comparable activities. On these templates, addition of host initiation factor, sigma, restores full activity to Enzyme B-P as well as to host core polymerase. Sigma also modifies the activity of Enzyme B-P on SP01 DNA, restoring some asymmetrical early RNA transcription while retaining some asymmetrical middle RNA transcription.    A protein fraction from B. subtilis infected with phage SP01 (fraction LGG) stimulates the activity of RNA polymerase (EC 2.7.7.6; nucleosidetriphosphate:RNA nucleotidyltransferase) core from uninfected bacteria. Fraction LGG contains a protein (P-28, molecular weight 28,000) that is labeled after phage infection and binds tightly to RNA polymerase core at a relatively high ionic strength. B. subtilis RNA polymerase core with bound P-28 has the transcription specificity of the previously purified, phage-modified B-P RNA polymerase; the latter contains two subunits, v-28 and v-13 (molecular weights 28,000 and 13,000, respectively) that are synthesized after phage infection. Both enzymes transcribe SP01 DNA preferentially and direct the asymmetric synthesis of viral middle RNA. P-28, like v-28, binds more tightly to B. subtilis RNA polymerase core than the B. subtilis initiation factor, sigma, at higher ionic strength. We propose that P-28 and v-28 are the same protein. P-28 and, by implication, v-28 suffice to endow the bacterial RNA polymerase core with a novel transcription specificity.    The effect of the exotoxin of Bacillus thuringiensis on the in vivo incorporation of [14-C] orotic acid into mouse liver nuclear rRNA and low molecular weight RNA was studied. The following results were obtained. 1. The exotoxin does not inhibit the synthesis of 45 S pre-rRNA, but causes a breakdown of these molecules. 2. The exotoxin inhibits the conversion of 38 S pre-rRNA into 32 S and 21 S. 3. The exotoxin inhibits the labelling of nuclear 5 S RNA, whereas the labelling of 4.6 S pre-tRNA is not affected. It is suggested that 5 S RNA may control the processing of 45 S pre-rRNA.    Phage-specific RNA synthesized early in the infection of Bacillus subtilis with SP82 hybridizes to both heavy (H) and light (L) strands of SP82 DNA nearly equally. Phage RNA synthesized during the middle of the infection hybridizes preferentially to the H strand. The ratio of H/L strand binding of RNAs synthesized in vitro by RNA polymerases isolated from uninfected and infected cells resembles the ratios of early and middle phage RNA classes, respectively. This supports the conclusion that a modified RNA polymerase is required for the transcription of middle RNA classes.    A linked cell-free system has been developed which is capable of transcribing and translating mamalian viral DNA, and its characteristics and requirements are outlined. In this system, simian virus 40 (SV40) DNA Form I (supercoiled) directed the synthesis of discrete polypeptides up to 85,000 daltons in size. One of these products was indistingusihable from authentic major virus capsid protein VPI, as judged by mobility on sodium dodecyl sulfate/polyacrylamide gels, antibody predipitation, and peptide analyses. The cell-free products larger than VPI comprised a number of polypeptides ranging in molecular weight from 50,000 to 85,000. These polypeptides demonstrated no immunological relationship whatsoever to the structural protein VPI. However, two of these products, along with one of approximately 25,000 dlatons, were precipitated with antiserum to SV40 tumor antigen. Linear SV40 DNA generated by the cleavage of Form I DNA with the restriction endonuclease EcoR1 was an efficient template in this system and also directed the synthesis of a polypeptide migrating with VPI on polyacrylamide gels. The potential of this system for defining a functional map of a DNA genome is discussed.    1. The cyclic peptide antibiotic tyrocidine, synthesized by Bacillus brevis (ATCC 8185), inhibits RNA synthesis in an in vitro transcriptional system by forming a complex with the DNA. 2. The linear peptide antibiotic gramicidin, synthesized by the same strain, reverses at least partly this inhibition. The molecular mechanism of this reactivation is unknown. Gramicidin by itself inhibits transcription in vitro. This inhibition is not due to a complex formation between DNA and the peptide. 4. A possible regulative role of the two peptides in sporulation is discussed.    An RNA polymerase (nucleosidetriphosphate:RNA nucleotidyltransferase, EC 2.7.7.6) has been purified from phage-SP01-infected Bacillus subtilis that copies RNA almost exclusively from the heavy strand of native SP01 DNA, the DNA strand from which &quot;middle&quot; and &quot;late&quot; classes of RNA are copied in vivo. Hybridization-competition established that this RNA polymerase termed enzyme A, preferentially synthesizes middle RNA in vitro. Enzyme A contains beta&apos;,beta, alpha, and two newly identified host polypeptides, variation of (21,500 daltons) and omega (11,000 daltons). All of these polypeptides are associated with highly purified RNA polymerase from uninfected bacteria. In addition, enzyme A contains phage-induced subunits of 26,000, 24,000, and 13,500 daltons. Enzyme A lacks sigma polypeptide, and strand-selective transcription by this enzyme is resistant to anti-sigma antibody. A reconstitution experiment strongly suggests that the host variation of protein is required in addition to a phage-induced subunit(s) (or an unidentified phage-induced modification) for strand-selective transcription of SP01 middle genes in vitro.    Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage phi 1m, a host-range variant, was isolated after mutagenesis of virulent bacteriophage phi 1. Unlike its wild-type antecedent, phi 1m could not form plaques on lawns of B subtilis 168 at 37 C, although it adsorbed to, penetrated, and killed this bacterium. Experiments conducted in liquid medium at 37 C showed that B. subtilis 168 cells allowed reduced levels of phi 1m development at low multiplicities of infection, whereas high multiplicity infections of this strain by the phage were abortive. Certain mutants, derived originally from B. subtilis 168, were observed to be permissive for phi 1m at 37 C; moreover, their permissive phenotype could be duplicated by growing wild-type B. subtilis 168 cells at temperatures above 47 C. Studies on phi 1m and host nucleic acid synthesis under nonpermissive conditions demonstrated that transciption and DNA synthesis proceeded up to 20 min after infection, after which time there was a cessation of all nucleic acid production. These observations are discussed with respect to other abortive bacteriophage infections in B. subtilis.    The transfer ribonucleic acid (tRNA) populations from log-phase cells, sporulating cells (stage III), and dormant spores were compared by tRNA-deoxyribonucleic acid hybridization techniques. New tRNA species not found in log-phase cells were observed in stage III cells. Some of the tRNA made during sporulation were also present in dormant spores. Although the role and function of these new tRNA species cannot be ascribed directly to the sporulation process, their presence indicates that new tRNA genes can be transcribed during sporulation and suggests that translational control may be exerted during sporulation by tRNA.    The RNA and proteins synthesized in an Escherichia coli cell-free system of protein synthesis directed by Bacillus subtilis phage phi29 DNA were studied. Hybridization-competition experiments showed that most of the RNA species synthesized in vitro are early RNAs. Many of the early proteins induced after phage infection were also synthesized in the E. coli cell-free system. None of the late proteins, structural or non-structural, were synthesized in the system in vitro.    A cell free protein synthesizing system, derived from E. coli, is shown to be a quantitiative assay system for messenger RNA extracted from B. subtilis infected with bacteriophage SPO1. DNA-directed protein synthesis in this system is shown to be limited mostly to those proteins whose messages are contained in early RNA. A phage induced enzyme, dCMP deaminase, is shown to be dependent on appearance of a class mRNA made in vivo in response to new initiations of transcription dependent on prior synthesis of phage induced protein. Control of the enzyme synthesized in the cell free system is contrasted with in vivo control, and an estimate of &quot;read-through&quot; by RNA polymerase in vitro is presented.    Transcription factor one (TF1), a protein synthesized after infection of B. subtilis by phage SPO1, is a specific inhibitor of SPO1 in vitro transcription. In this paper, we investigate the effect of TF1 on SPO1-specific in vitro protein synthesis, using SPO1 DNA or messenger RNA as templates. Protein syhthesis is measured by incorporation of radioactive amino acids into acid insoluble form, synthesis of a phage-specific enzymatic activity, and analysis of radioactive polypeptides by acrylamide gel electrophoresis. TF1 is shown to inhibit the DNA-dependent synthesis of all SPO1 proteins which can be made in vitro, but to have no specific effect on RNA-dependent protein synthesis in vitro.
